
# Atomic force microscope

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Topographic scan of a glass surface

<IMG>

<IMG>

Microscope AFM

The atomic force microscope (AFM) or scanning force microscope (SFM) is a very
high-resolution type of scanning probe microscope, with demonstrated
resolution of fractions of a nanometer, more than 1000 times better than the
optical diffraction limit. The precursor to the AFM, the scanning tunneling
microscope, was developed by Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer in the early
1980s, a development that earned them the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1986.
Binnig, Quate and Gerber invented the first AFM in 1986. The AFM is one of the
foremost tools for imaging, measuring and manipulating matter at the
nanoscale. The information is gathered by "feeling" the surface with a
mechanical probe. Piezoelectric elements that facilitate tiny but accurate and
precise movements on (electronic) command enable the very precise scanning.

## Contents

  * 1 Basic principle
  * 2 Imaging modes
  * 3 Tapping Mode
  * 4 Non-Contact Mode
  * 5 AFM -Beam Deflection Detection
  * 6 Force spectroscopy
  * 7 Identification of individual surface atoms
  * 8 Advantages and disadvantages
  * 9 Piezoelectric Scanners
  * 10 See also
  * 11 References

  
## [edit] Basic principle

Part of a series of articles on  
Nanotechnology  
History  
Implications  
Applications  
Regulation  
Organizations  
In fiction and popular culture  
List of topics  
Subfields and related fields  
Nanomaterials  
Fullerenes  
Carbon nanotubes  
Nanoparticles  
Nanomedicine  
Nanotoxicology  
Nanosensor  
  
Molecular self-assembly  
Self-assembled monolayer  
Supramolecular assembly  
DNA nanotechnology  
Nanoelectronics  
Molecular electronics  
Nanocircuitry  
Nanolithography  
Nanoionics  
Nanorobotics  
Scanning probe microscopy  
Atomic force microscope  
Scanning tunneling microscope  
Molecular nanotechnology  
Molecular assembler  
Mechanosynthesis  
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Block Diagram of Atomic Force Microscope

<IMG>

<IMG>

AFM cantilever (after use) in the Scanning Electron Microscope, magnification
1,000 x (image width ~ 100 micrometers)

<IMG>

<IMG>

AFM cantilever (after use) in the Scanning Electron Microscope, magnification
3,000 x (image width ~ 30 micrometers)

The AFM consists of a microscale cantilever with a sharp tip (probe) at its
end that is used to scan the specimen surface. The cantilever is typically
silicon or silicon nitride with a tip radius of curvature on the order of
nanometers. When the tip is brought into proximity of a sample surface, forces
between the tip and the sample lead to a deflection of the cantilever
according to Hooke's law. Depending on the situation, forces that are measured
in AFM include mechanical contact force, Van der Waals forces, capillary
forces, chemical bonding, electrostatic forces, magnetic forces (see Magnetic
force microscope (MFM)), Casimir forces, solvation forces etc. As well as
force, additional quantities may simultaneously be measured through the use of
specialised types of probe (see Scanning thermal microscopy, photothermal
microspectroscopy, etc.). Typically, the deflection is measured using a laser
spot reflected from the top surface of the cantilever into an array of
photodiodes. Other methods that are used include optical interferometry,
capacitive sensing or piezoresistive AFM cantilevers. These cantilevers are
fabricated with piezoresistive elements that act as a strain gauge. Using a
Wheatstone bridge, strain in the AFM cantilever due to deflection can be
measured, but this method is not as sensitive as laser deflection or
interferometry.

If the tip was scanned at a constant height, a risk would exist that the tip
collides with the surface, causing damage. Hence, in most cases a feedback
mechanism is employed to adjust the tip-to-sample distance to maintain a
constant force between the tip and the sample. Traditionally, the sample is
mounted on a piezoelectric tube, that can move the sample in the z direction
for maintaining a constant force, and the x and y directions for scanning the
sample. Alternatively a 'tripod' configuration of three piezo crystals may be
employed, with each responsible for scanning in the x,y and z directions. This
eliminates some of the distortion effects seen with a tube scanner. In newer
designs, the tip is mounted on a vertical piezo scanner while the sample is
being scanned in X and Y using another piezo block. The resulting map of the
area s = f(x,y) represents the topography of the sample.

The AFM can be operated in a number of modes, depending on the application. In
general, possible imaging modes are divided into static (also called Contact)
modes and a variety of dynamic (or non-contact) modes where the cantilever is
vibrated.

## [edit] Imaging modes

The primary modes of operation are static (contact) mode and dynamic mode. In
the static mode operation, the static tip deflection is used as a feedback
signal. Because the measurement of a static signal is prone to noise and
drift, low stiffness cantilevers are used to boost the deflection signal.
However, close to the surface of the sample, attractive forces can be quite
strong, causing the tip to 'snap-in' to the surface. Thus static mode AFM is
almost always done in contact where the overall force is repulsive.
Consequently, this technique is typically called 'contact mode'. In contact
mode, the force between the tip and the surface is kept constant during
scanning by maintaining a constant deflection.

In the dynamic mode, the cantilever is externally oscillated at or close to
its fundamental resonance frequency or a harmonic. The oscillation amplitude,
phase and resonance frequency are modified by tip-sample interaction forces;
these changes in oscillation with respect to the external reference
oscillation provide information about the sample's characteristics. Schemes
for dynamic mode operation include frequency modulation and the more common
amplitude modulation. In frequency modulation, changes in the oscillation
frequency provide information about tip-sample interactions. Frequency can be
measured with very high sensitivity and thus the frequency modulation mode
allows for the use of very stiff cantilevers. Stiff cantilevers provide
stability very close to the surface and, as a result, this technique was the
first AFM technique to provide true atomic resolution in ultra-high vacuum
conditions (Giessibl).

In amplitude modulation, changes in the oscillation amplitude or phase provide
the feedback signal for imaging. In amplitude modulation, changes in the phase
of oscillation can be used to discriminate between different types of
materials on the surface. Amplitude modulation can be operated either in the
non-contact or in the intermittent contact regime. In ambient conditions, most
samples develop a liquid meniscus layer. Because of this, keeping the probe
tip close enough to the sample for short-range forces to become detectable
while preventing the tip from sticking to the surface presents a major hurdle
for the non-contact dynamic mode in ambient conditions. Dynamic contact mode
(also called intermittent contact or tapping mode) was developed to bypass
this problem (Zhong et al.). In dynamic contact mode, the cantilever is
oscillated such that the separation distance between the cantilever tip and
the sample surface is modulated.

Amplitude modulation has also been used in the non-contact regime to image
with atomic resolution by using very stiff cantilevers and small amplitudes in
an ultra-high vacuum environment.

## [edit] Tapping Mode

<IMG>

<IMG>

Single polymer chains (0.4 nm thick) recorded in a tapping mode under aqueous
media with different pH. Green locations of the two-chains-superposition
correspond to 0.8 nm thickness (Roiter and Minko, 2005).

In tapping mode the cantilever is driven to oscillate up and down at near its
resonance frequency by a small piezoelectric element mounted in the AFM tip
holder. The amplitude of this oscillation is greater than 10 nm, typically 100
to 200 nm. Due to the interaction of forces acting on the cantilever when the
tip comes close to the surface, Van der Waals force or dipole-dipole
interaction, electrostatic forces, etc cause the amplitude of this oscillation
to decrease as the tip gets closer to the sample. An electronic servo uses the
piezoelectric actuator to control the height of the cantilever above the
sample. The servo adjusts the height to maintain a set cantilever oscillation
amplitude as the cantilever is scanned over the sample. A Tapping AFM image is
therefore produced by imaging the force of the oscillating contacts of the tip
with the sample surface. This is an improvement on conventional contact AFM,
in which the cantilever just drags across the surface at constant force and
can result in surface damage. Tapping mode is gentle enough even for the
visualization of supported lipid bilayers or adsorbed single polymer molecules
(for instance, 0.4 nm thick chains of synthetic polyelectrolytes) under liquid
medium. At the application of proper scanning parameters, the conformation of
single molecules remains unchanged for hours (Roiter and Minko, 2005).

## [edit] Non-Contact Mode

Here the tip of the cantilever does not contact the sample surface. Instead,
during scanning, it oscillates above the adsorbed fluid layer on the surface.
The cantilever is oscillated at a frequency slightly above its resonance
frequency. The amplitude is typically a few nanometers (<10nm). The van der
Waals forces, which extend from 1nm to 10nm above the adsorbed fluid layer, or
any other long range force which extends above the surface decreases the
resonance frequency of the cantilever. The decrease in resonance frequency
causes the amplitude of oscillation to decrease. The feedback loop maintains a
constant oscillation amplitude or frequency by vertically moving the scanner
at each (x,y) data point until a âsetpointâ amplitude or frequency is
reached. The distance the scanner moves vertically at each (x,y) data point is
stored by the computer to form the topographic image of the sample surface.

<IMG>

<IMG>

AFM - Non-Contact Mode

## [edit] AFM -Beam Deflection Detection

Laser light from a solid state diode is reflected off the back of the
cantilever and collected by a position sensitive detector (PSD) consisting of
two closely spaced photodiodes whose output signal is collected by a
differential amplifier. Angular displacement of cantilever results in one
photodiode collecting more light than the other photodiode, producing an
output signal (the difference between the photodiode signals normalized by
their sum) which is proportional to the deflection of the cantilever. It
detects cantilever deflections <1Ã (thermal noise limited). A long beam path
(several cm) amplifies changes in beam angle.

<IMG>

<IMG>

AFM Beam Deflection Detection

## [edit] Force spectroscopy

Another major application of AFM (besides imaging) is force spectroscopy, the
measurement of force-distance curves. For this method, the AFM tip is extended
towards and retracted from the surface as the static deflection of the
cantilever is monitored as a function of piezoelectric displacement. These
measurements have been used to measure nanoscale contacts, atomic bonding, Van
der Waals forces, and Casimir forces, dissolution forces in liquids and single
molecule stretching and rupture forces (Hinterdorfer & DufrÃªne). Forces of
the order of a few pico-Newton can now be routinely measured with a vertical
distance resolution of better than 0.1 nanometer.

Problems with the technique include no direct measurement of the tip-sample
separation and the common need for low stiffness cantilevers which tend to
'snap' to the surface. The snap-in can be reduced by measuring in liquids or
by using stiffer cantilevers, but in the latter case a more sensitive
deflection sensor is needed. By applying a small dither to the tip, the
stiffness (force gradient) of the bond can be measured as well (Hoffmann et
al.).

## [edit] Identification of individual surface atoms

<IMG>

<IMG>

The atoms of a Sodium Chloride crystal viewed with an Atomic Force Microscope

The AFM can be used to image and manipulate atoms and structures on a variety
of surfaces. The atom at the apex of the tip "senses" individual atoms on the
underlying surface when it forms incipient chemical bonds with each atom.
Because these chemical interactions subtly alter the tip's vibration
frequency, they can be detected and mapped.

Physicist Oscar Custance (Osaka University, Graduate School of Engineering,
Osaka, Japan) and his team used this principle to distinguish between atoms of
silicon, tin and lead on an alloy surface (Nature 2007, 446, 64).

  
The trick is to first measure these forces precisely for each type of atom
expected in the sample. The team found that the tip interacted most strongly
with silicon atoms, and interacted 23% and 41% less strongly with tin and lead
atoms. Thus, each different type of atom can be identified in the matrix as
the tip is moved across the surface.

Such a technique has been used now in biology and extended recently to cell
biology. Forces corresponding to (i) the unbinding of receptor ligand couples
(ii) unfolding of proteins (iii) cell adhesion at single cell scale have been
gathered.

## [edit] Advantages and disadvantages

<IMG>

<IMG>

The first Atomic Force Microscope

The AFM has several advantages over the scanning electron microscope (SEM).
Unlike the electron microscope which provides a two-dimensional projection or
a two-dimensional image of a sample, the AFM provides a true three-dimensional
surface profile. Additionally, samples viewed by AFM do not require any
special treatments (such as metal/carbon coatings) that would irreversibly
change or damage the sample. While an electron microscope needs an expensive
vacuum environment for proper operation, most AFM modes can work perfectly
well in ambient air or even a liquid environment. This makes it possible to
study biological macromolecules and even living organisms. In principle, AFM
can provide higher resolution than SEM. It has been shown to give true atomic
resolution in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) and, more recently, in liquid
environments. High resolution AFM is comparable in resolution to Scanning
Tunneling Microscopy and Transmission Electron Microscopy.

A disadvantage of AFM compared with the scanning electron microscope (SEM) is
the image size. The SEM can image an area on the order of millimetres by
millimetres with a depth of field on the order of millimetres. The AFM can
only image a maximum height on the order of micrometres and a maximum scanning
area of around 150 by 150 micrometres.

Another inconvenience is that an incorrect choice of tip for the required
resolution can lead to image artifacts. Traditionally the AFM could not scan
images as fast as an SEM, requiring several minutes for a typical scan, while
a SEM is capable of scanning at near real-time (although at relatively low
quality) after the chamber is evacuated. The relatively slow rate of scanning
during AFM imaging often leads to thermal drift in the image (Lapshin, 2004,
2007), making the AFM microscope less suited for measuring accurate distances
between artifacts on the image. However, several fast-acting designs were
suggested to increase microscope scanning productivity (Lapshin and Obyedkov,
1993) including what is being termed videoAFM (reasonable quality images are
being obtained with videoAFM at video rate - faster than the average SEM). To
eliminate image distortions induced by thermodrift, several methods were also
proposed (Lapshin, 2004, 2007).

AFM images can also be affected by hysteresis of the piezoelectric material
(Lapshin, 1995) and cross-talk between the (x,y,z) axes that may require
software enhancement and filtering. Such filtering could "flatten" out real
topographical features. However, newer AFM use real-time correction software
(for example, feature-oriented scanning, Lapshin, 2004, 2007) or closed-loop
scanners which practically eliminate these problems. Some AFM also use
separated orthogonal scanners (as opposed to a single tube) which also serve
to eliminate cross-talk problems.

Due to the nature of AFM probes, they cannot normally measure steep walls or
overhangs. Specially made cantilevers can be modulated sideways as well as up
and down (as with dynamic contact and non-contact modes) to measure sidewalls,
at the cost of more expensive cantilevers and additional artifacts.

## [edit] Piezoelectric Scanners

AFM scanners are made from piezoelectric material, which expands and contracts
proportionally to an applied voltage. Whether they elongate or contract
depends upon the polarity of the voltage applied. The scanner is constructed
by combining independently operated piezo electrodes for X, Y, & Z into a
single tube, forming a scanner which can manipulate samples and probes with
extreme precision in 3 dimensions.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Piezoelectric Scanner

Scanners are characterized by their sensitivity which is the ratio of piezo
movement to piezo voltage, i.e. by how much the piezo material extends or
contracts per applied volt. Because of differences in material or size, the
sensitivity varies from scanner to scanner.

Sensitivity varies non-linearly with respect to scan size. Piezo scanners
exhibit more sensitivity at the end than at the beginning of a scan. This
causes the forward and reverse scans to behave differently and display
hysteresis between the two scan directions. This can be corrected by applying
a non-linear voltage to the piezo electrodes to cause linear scanner movement
and calibrating the scanner accordingly.

The sensitivity of piezoelectric materials decreases exponentially with time.
This causes most of the change in sensitivity to occur in the initial stages
of the scannerâs life. Piezoelectric scanners are run for approximately 48
hours before they are shipped from the factory so that they are past the point
where we can expect large changes in sensitivity. As the scanner ages, the
sensitivity will change less with time and the scanner would seldom require
recalibration.

## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikibooks has a book on the topic of

The Opensource Handbook of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Atomic force microscopy  
  * Interfacial force microscope
  * Friction force microscope
  * Scanning tunneling microscope
  * Scanning probe microscopy
  * Scanning voltage microscopy

## [edit] References

  * A. D L. Humphris, M. J. Miles, J. K. Hobbs, A mechanical microscope: High-speed atomic force microscopy, Applied Physics Letters 86, 034106 (2005).
  * D. Sarid, Scanning Force Microscopy, Oxford Series in Optical and Imaging Sciences, Oxford University Press, New York (1991)
  * R. Dagani, Individual Surface Atoms Identified, Chemical & Engineering News, 5 March 2007, page 13. Published by American Chemical Society
  * Q. Zhong, D. Inniss, K. Kjoller, V. B. Elings, Surf. Sci. Lett. 290, L688 (1993).
  * V. J. Morris, A. R. Kirby, A. P. Gunning, Atomic Force Microscopy for Biologists. (Book) (December 1999) Imperial College Press.
  * J. W. Cross SPM - Scanning Probe Microscopy Website
  * P. Hinterdorfer, Y. F. DufrÃªne, Nature Methods, 3, 5 (2006)
  * F. Giessibl, Advances in Atomic Force Microscopy, Reviews of Modern Physics 75 (3), 949-983 (2003).
  * R. H. Eibl, V.T. Moy, Atomic force microscopy measurements of protein-ligand interactions on living cells. Methods Mol Biol. 305:439-50 (2005)
  * P. M. Hoffmann, A. Oral, R. A. Grimble, H. Ã. Ãzer, S. Jeffery, J. B. Pethica, Proc. Royal Soc. A 457, 1161 (2001).
  * R. V. Lapshin, O. V. Obyedkov, Fast-acting piezoactuator and digital feedback loop for scanning tunneling microscopes, Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 2883-2887, 1993.
  * R. V. Lapshin, Analytical model for the approximation of hysteresis loop and its application to the scanning tunneling microscope, Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 66, no. 9, pp. 4718-4730, 1995.
  * R. V. Lapshin, Feature-oriented scanning methodology for probe microscopy and nanotechnology, Nanotechnology, vol. 15, iss. 9, pp. 1135-1151, 2004.
  * R. V. Lapshin, Automatic drift elimination in probe microscope images based on techniques of counter-scanning and topography feature recognition, Measurement Science and Technology, vol. 18, iss. 3, pp. 907-927, 2007.
  * P. West, Introduction to Atomic Force Microscopy: Theory, Practice and Applications --- www.AFMUniversity.org
  * R. W. Carpick and M. Salmeron, Scratching the surface: Fundamental investigations of tribology with atomic force microscopy, Chemical Reviews, vol. 97, iss. 4, pp. 1163-1194 (2007).
  * Y. Roiter and S. Minko, AFM Single Molecule Experiments at the Solid-Liquid Interface: In Situ Conformation of Adsorbed Flexible Polyelectrolyte Chains, Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 127, iss. 45, pp. 15688-15689 (2005).

v â¢ d â¢ e

Scanning probe microscopy  
Common

Atomic force Â· Scanning tunneling

Typical atomic force microscopy set-up  
Other

Electrostatic force Â· Electrochemical scanning tunneling Â· Kelvin probe
force Â· Magnetic force Â· Magnetic resonance force Â· Near-field scanning
optical Â· Photothermal microspectroscopy Â· Scanning capacitance Â· Scanning
gate Â· Scanning Hall probe Â· Scanning ion-conductance Â· Spin polarized
scanning tunneling Â· Scanning voltage  
Applications

Scanning probe lithography Â· Dip-Pen Nanolithography Â· Feature-oriented
scanning Â· IBM Millipede  
See also

Nanotechnology Â· Microscope Â· Microscopy  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atomic_force_microscope"

Categories: Scanning probe microscopy | Semiconductor analysis |
Intermolecular forces | Scientific techniques

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 23:28.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



