
# First aid

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the provision of immediate care. For the 'Transformers'
character, see First Aid (Transformers).

Sister project Wikibooks has a book on the topic of

First Aid  
<IMG>

<IMG>

First Aid symbol

First aid is the provision of initial care for an illness or injury. It is
usually performed by a lay person to a sick or injured casualty until
definitive medical treatment can be accessed. Certain self-limiting illnesses
or minor injuries may not require further medical care past the first aid
intervention. It generally consists of a series of simple and, in some cases,
potentially life-saving techniques that an individual can be trained to
perform with minimal equipment.

While first aid can also be performed on animals, the term generally refers to
care of human patients.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Aims
  * 3 Key skills
    * 3.1 Preserving life
    * 3.2 Promoting recovery
  * 4 Training
    * 4.1 Australia
    * 4.2 Canada
    * 4.3 Ireland
    * 4.4 The Netherlands
    * 4.5 United Kingdom
  * 5 Specific disciplines
  * 6 Symbols
  * 7 Conditions that often require first aid
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] History

The earliest instances of recorded first aid were provided by religious
knights, such as the Knights Hospitaller, formed in the 11th century,
providing care to pilgrims and knights, and training other knights in how to
treat common battlefield injuries.[1] The practice of first aid fell largely
in to disuse during the High Middle Ages, and organized societies were not
seen again until in 1859 Henry Dunant organized local villagers to help
victims of the Battle of Solferino, including the provision of first aid. Four
years later, four nations met in Geneva and formed the organization which has
grown into the Red Cross, with a key stated aim of "aid to sick and wounded
soldiers in the field".[1] This was followed by the formation of St. John
Ambulance in 1877, based on the principles of the Knights Hospitaller, to
teach first aid, and numerous other organization joined them, with the term
first aid first coined in 1878 as civilian ambulance services spread as a
combination of 'first treatment' and 'national aid'[1] in large railway
centres and mining districts as well as with police forces. First aid training
began to spread through the empire through organisations such as St John,
often starting, as in the UK, with high risk activities such as ports and
railways.[2]

Many developments in first aid and many other medical techniques have been
driven by wars, such as in the case of the American Civil War, which prompted
Clara Barton to organize the American Red Cross.[3] Today, there are several
groups that promote first aid, such as the military and the Scouting movement.
New techniques and equipment have helped make todayâs first aid simple and
effective.

## [edit] Aims

The key aims of first aid can be summarised in three key points:[4]

  * Preserve life \- the overriding aim of all medical care, including first aid, is to save lives
  * Prevent further harm \- also sometimes called prevent the condition from worsening, this covers both external factors, such as moving a patient away from any cause of harm, and applying first aid techniques to prevent worsening of the condition, such as applying pressure to stop a bleed becoming dangerous.
  * Promote recovery \- first aid also involves trying to start the recovery process from the illness or injury, and in some cases might involve completing a treatment, such as in the case of applying a plaster to a small wound.

First aid training also involves the prevention of initial injury and
responder safety, and the treatment phases.

## [edit] Key skills

<IMG>

<IMG>

In case of tongue fallen backwards, blocking the airway, it is necessary to
hyperextend the head and pull up the chin, so that the tongue lifts and clears
the airway.

Certain skills are considered essential to the provision of first aid and are
taught ubiquitously. Particularly, the "ABC"s of first aid, which focus on
critical life-saving intervention, must be rendered before treatment of less
serious injuries. ABC stands for Airway, Breathing, and Circulation. The same
mnemonic is used by all emergency health professionals. Attention must first
be brought to the airway to ensure it is clear. Obstruction (choking) is a
life-threatening emergency. Following evaluation of the airway, a first aid
attendant would determine adequacy of breathing and provide rescue breathing
if necessary. Assessment of circulation is now not usually carried out for
patients who are not breathing, with first aiders now trained to go straight
to chest compressions (and thus providing artificial circulation) but pulse
checks may be done on less serious patients.

Some organizations add a fourth step of "D" for Deadly bleeding or
Defibrillation, while others consider this as part of the Circulation step.
Variations on techniques to evaluate and maintain the ABCs depend on the skill
level of the first aider. Once the ABCs are secured, first aiders can begin
additional treatments, as required. Some organizations teach the same order of
priority using the "3Bs": Breathing, Bleeding, and Bones (or "4Bs": Breathing,
Bleeding, Brain, and Bones). While the ABCs and 3Bs are taught to be performed
sequentially, certain conditions may require the consideration of two steps
simultaneously. This includes the provision of both artificial respiration and
chest compressions to someone who is not breathing and has no pulse, and the
consideration of cervical spine injuries when ensuring an open airway.

### [edit] Preserving life

In order to preserve life, all persons require to have an open airway - a
clear passage where air can move in through the mouth or nose through the
pharynx and down in to the lungs, without obstruction. Conscious people will
maintain their own airway automatically, but those who are unconscious (with a
GCS of less than 8) may be unable to maintain a patent airway, as the part of
the brain which autonomously controls in normal situations may not be
functioning.

If the patient was breathing, a first aider would normally then place them in
the recovery position, with the patient leant over on their side, which also
has the effect of clearing the tongue from the pharynx. It also avoids a
common cause of death in unconscious patients, which is choking on
regurgitated stomach contents.

The airway can also become blocked through a foreign object becoming lodged in
the pharynx or larynx, commonly called choking. The first aider will be taught
to deal with this through a combination of âback slapsâ and âabdominal
thrustsâ.

Once the airway has been opened, the first aider would assess to see if the
patient is breathing. If there is no breathing, or the patient is not
breathing normally, such as agonal breathing, the first aider would undertake
what is probably the most recognized first aid procedure - Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation or CPR, which involves breathing for the patient, and manually
massaging the heart to promote blood flow around the body.

### [edit] Promoting recovery

The first aider is also likely to be trained in dealing with injuries such as
cuts, grazes or broken bones. They may be able to deal with the situation in
its entirety (a small adhesive bandage on a paper cut), or may be required to
maintain the condition of something like a broken bone, until the next stage
of definitive care (usually an ambulance) arrives.

## [edit] Training

<IMG>

<IMG>

First aid scenario training in progress

Much of first aid is common sense. Basic principles, such as knowing to use an
adhesive bandage or applying direct pressure on a bleed, are often acquired
passively through life experiences. However, to provide effective, life-saving
first aid interventions requires instruction and practical training. This is
especially true where it relates to potentially fatal illnesses and injuries,
such as those that require cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR); these
procedures may be invasive, and carry a risk of further injury to the patient
and the provider. As with any training, it is more useful if it occurs before
an actual emergency, and in many countries, emergency ambulance dispatchers
may give basic first aid instructions over the phone while the ambulance is on
the way.

Training is generally provided by attending a course, typically leading to
certification. Due to regular changes in procedures and protocols, based on
updated clinical knowledge, and to maintain skill, attendance at regular
refresher courses or re-certification is often necessary. First aid training
is often available through community organizations such as the Red Cross and
St. John Ambulance, or through commercial providers, who will train people for
a fee. This commercial training is most common for training of employees to
perform first aid in their workplace. Many community organizations also
provide a commercial service, which complements their community programmes.

### [edit] Australia

In Australia, Nationally recognized First Aid certificates may only be issued
by Registered training organisations who are accredited on the National
Training Information System (NTIS). Most First Aid certificates are issued at
one of 3 levels:

  * Level 1 (or âBasic First Aidâ, or âBasic Life Supportâ): is a 1-day course covering primarily life-threatening emergencies: CPR, bleeding, choking and other life-threatening medical emergencies.
  * Level 2 (âSenior First Aidâ) is a 2 day course that covers all the aspects of training in Level 1, as well as specialized training for treatment of burns, bites, stings, electric shock and poisons. Level 2 reaccreditation is a 1 day course which must be taken every 3 years, but CPR reaccrediation may be required more frequently (typically yearly).
  * Level 3 (âOccupational First Aidâ) is a 4-day course covering advanced first aid, use of oxygen and Automated external defibrillators and documentation. It is suitable for workplace First Aiders and those who manage First Aid facilities.

Other courses outside these levels are commonly taught, including CPR-only
courses, Advanced Resuscitation, Remote Area or Wilderness First Aid,
Administering Medications (such as salbutamol or the Epi-Pen) and specialized
courses for parents, school teachers, community first responders or hazardous
workplace first aiders. CPR Re-accredidation courses are sometimes required
yearly, regardless of the length of the overall certification.

### [edit] Canada

In Canada, first aid certificates are awarded by one of several organizations
including the Red Cross, the Lifesaving Society, St. John Ambulance, the Heart
and Stroke Foundation, and Ski Patrol. Workplace safety regulations vary
depending on occupation. Many workplaces opt to have their employees trained
in Standard First Aid (see below).

  * Emergency First Aid: is an 8-hour course covering primarily life-threatening emergencies: CPR, bleeding, choking and other life-threatening medical emergencies.
  * Standard First Aid: is a 16-hour course that covers the same material as Emergency First Aid and will include training for some, but not all, of the following: breaks; burns; poisons, bites and stings; eye injuries; head and neck injuries; chest injuries; wound care; emergency child birth; and multiple casualty management.
  * Medical First Responder (BTLS - known by different names among different Canadian organizations): is a 40 hour course. It requires Standard First Aid certification as a prerequisite. Candidates are trained in the use of oxygen, Automated external defibrillators, airway management, and the use of additional emergency equipment.

CPR certification in Canada is broken into several levels. Depending on the
level, the lay person will learn CPR and choking procedures for adults,
children, and infants.

CPR H.C.P. (Health Care Professional) also provides training on artificial
respiration, the use of bag valve masks, and suction. This level of
qualification is usually not offered to the general public.

### [edit] Ireland

In Ireland, the workplace qualification is the Occupational First Aid
Certificate. The Health and Safety Authority issue the standards for first aid
at work and hold a register of qualified instructors, examiners and
organisations that can provide the course. A FETAC Level 5 certificate is
awarded after passing a three day course and is valid for two years from date
of issue. Occupational First Aiders are more qualified than Cardiac First
Responders (Cardiac First Response and training on the AED is now part of the
OFA course) but less qualified than Emergency First Responders but strangely
Occupational First Aid is the only one of the three not certified by PHECC.
Organisations offering the certificate include, Ireland's largest first aid
organisation, the Order of Malta Ambulance Corps, the St John Ambulance
Brigade, and the Irish Red Cross. The Irish Red Cross also provides a
Practical First Aid Course aimed at the general public dealing primarily with
family members getting injured. Many other (purely commercially run)
organisations offer training.

### [edit] The Netherlands

In the The Netherlands first aid training en certification for lay persons are
provided mostly by specialised (commercial) first aid training companies or
voluteers of the "Dutch Red Cross" and the foundations "Het Oranje Kruis" and
"LPEV". They offer a variety of levels in first aid training, from basic CPR
to First Responder. Medical first aid must be provided by certified ambulance
crews, physicians and in hospitals.

### [edit] United Kingdom

In the United Kingdom, there are two main types of first aid courses offered.
An âEmergency Aid for Appointed Personsâ course typically lasts one day,
and covers the basics, focusing on critical interventions for conditions such
as cardiac arrest and severe bleeding, and is usually not formally assessed. A
âFirst Aid at Workâ course is usually a four-day course (two days for a
re-qualification) that covers the full spectrum of first aid, and is formally
assessed by recognized Health and Safety Executive assessors. Certificates for
the âFirst Aid at Workâ course are issued by the training organization and
are valid for a period of three years from the date the delegate passes the
course. Other courses offered by training organizations such as St. John
Ambulance, St. Andrewâs Ambulance Association or the British Red Cross
include Baby & Child Courses, manual handling, people moving, and courses
geared towards more advanced life support, such as defibrillation and
administration of medical gases such as oxygen & entonox).

## [edit] Specific disciplines

There are several types of first aid (and first aider) which require specific
additional training. These are usually undertaken to fulfill the demands of
the work or activity undertaken.

  * Aquatic/Marine first aid \- Usually practiced by professionals such as lifeguards, Professional mariners or in diver rescue, and covers the specific problems which may be faced after water-based rescue and/or delayed MedEvac.
  * Battlefield first aid \- This takes in to account the specific needs of treating wounded combatants and non-combatants during armed conflict.
  * Hyperbaric first aid \- Which may be practiced by SCUBA diving professionals, who need to treat conditions such as the bends.
  * Oxygen first aid \- Providing oxygen to casualties who suffer from conditions resulting in hypoxia.
  * Wilderness first aid is the provision of first aid under conditions where the arrival of emergency responders or the evacuation of an injured person may be delayed due to constraints of terrain, weather, and available persons or equipment. It may be necessary to care for an injured person for several hours or days.

## [edit] Symbols

For more details on this topic, see Emblems of the Red Cross#Use of the
emblems.

Although commonly associated with first aid, the symbol of a red cross is an
official protective symbol of the Red Cross. According to the Geneva
Conventions and other international laws, the use of this and similar symbols
is reserved for official agencies of the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent, and as a protective emblem for medical personnel and facilities in
combat situations. Use by any other person or organization is illegal, and may
lead to prosecution.

The internationally accepted symbol for first aid is the white cross on a
green background shown at the start of the page.

Some organizations may make use of the Star of Life, although this is usually
reserved for use by ambulance services, or may use symbols such as the Maltese
Cross, like the Order of Malta Ambulance Corps and St John Ambulance. Other
symbols may also be used.

<IMG>

ISO First Aid Symbol

<IMG>

Symbol of the Red Cross

<IMG>

Maltese or Amalfi Cross

<IMG>

Star of life  
## [edit] Conditions that often require first aid

Also see medical emergency.

  * Altitude sickness, which can begin in susceptible people at altitudes as low as 5,000 feet, can cause potentially fatal swelling of the brain or lungs.[5]
  * Anaphylaxis, a life-threatening condition in which the airway can become constricted and the patient may go into shock. The reaction can be caused by a systemic allergic reaction to allergens such as insect bites or peanuts. Anaphylaxis is initially treated with injection of epinephrine.
  * Battlefield First aid - This protocol refers to treating shrapnel, gunshot wounds, burns, bone fractures, etc. as seen either in the âtraditionalâ battlefield setting or in an area subject to damage by large scale weaponry, such as a bomb blast or other terrorist activity.
  * Bone fracture, a break in a bone initially treated by stabilizing the fracture with a splint.
  * Burns, which can result in damage to tissues and loss of body fluids through the burn site.
  * Choking, blockage of the airway which can quickly result in death due to lack of oxygen if the patientâs trachea is not cleared, for example by the Heimlich Maneuver.
  * Childbirth.
  * Cramps in muscles due to lactic acid build up caused either by inadequate oxygenation of muscle or lack of water or salt.
  * Diving disorders, drowning or asphyxiation.[6]
  * Gender-specific conditions, such as dysmenorrhea and testicular torsion.
  * Heart attack, or inadequate blood flow to the blood vessels supplying the heart muscle.
  * Heat stroke, also known as sunstroke or hyperthermia, which tends to occur during heavy exercise in high humidity, or with inadequate water, though it may occur spontaneously in some chronically ill persons. Sunstroke, especially when the victim has been unconscious, often causes major damage to body systems such as brain, kidney, liver, gastric tract. Unconsciousness for more than two hours usually leads to permanent disability. Emergency treatment involves rapid cooling of the patient.
  * Heat syncope, another stage in the same process as heat stroke, occurs under similar conditions as heat stroke and is not distinguished from the latter by some authorities.
  * Heavy bleeding, treated by applying pressure (manually and later with a pressure bandage) to the wound site and elevating the limb if possible.
  * Hyperglycemia (diabetic coma) and Hypoglycemia (insulin shock).
  * Hypothermia, or Exposure, occurs when a personâs core body temperature falls below 33.7Â°C (92.6Â°F). First aid for a mildly hypothermic patient includes rewarming, but rewarming a severely hypothermic person could result in a fatal arrhythmia, an irregular heart rhythm.
  * Insect and animal bites and stings.
  * Joint dislocation.
  * Poisoning, which can occur by injection, inhalation, absorption, or ingestion.
  * Seizures, or a malfunction in the electrical activity in the brain. Three types of seizures include a grand mal (which usually features convulsions as well as temporary respiratory abnormalities, change in skin complexion, etc) and petit mal (which usually features twitching, rapid blinking, and/or fidgeting as well as altered consciousness and temporary respiratory abnormalities).
  * Muscle strains and Sprains, a temporary dislocation of a joint that immediately reduces automatically but may result in ligament damage.
  * Stroke, a temporary loss of blood supply to the brain.
  * Toothache, which can result in severe pain and loss of the tooth but is rarely life threatening, unless over time the infection spreads into the bone of the jaw and starts osteomyelitis.
  * Wounds and bleeding, including lacerations, incisions and abrasions, Gastrointestinal bleeding, avulsions and Sucking chest wounds, treated with an occlusive dressing to let air out but not in.

## [edit] See also

  * Abdominal thrusts
  * Ambulance
  * Artificial respiration
  * Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
  * Mental health first aid
  * Occlusive dressing
  * Oxygen first aid
  * Triage
  * Tourniquet
  * Recovery position

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c First Aid: From Witchdoctors & Religious Knights to Modern Doctors, retrieved December 10, 2006.
  2. ^ Industrial Revolution: St. John Ambulance, retrieved December 10, 2006.
  3. ^ American Red Cross -- Museum, retrieved December 10, 2006.
  4. ^ "Accidents and first aid". NHS Direct. http://www.nhsdirect.nhs.uk/articles/article.aspx?articleId=450. Retrieved on 2008-10-04.
  5. ^ Cymerman, A; Rock, PB. Medical Problems in High Mountain Environments. A Handbook for Medical Officers. USARIEM-TN94-2. US Army Research Inst. of Environmental Medicine Thermal and Mountain Medicine Division Technical Report. http://archive.rubicon-foundation.org/7976. Retrieved on 2009-03-05.
  6. ^ Longphre, John M.; Petar J. DeNoble; Richard E. Moon; Richard D. Vann; John J. Freiberger (2007). "First aid normobaric oxygen for the treatment of recreational diving injuries.". Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine 34 (1): 43â49. ISSN 1066-2936. OCLC 26915585. PMID 17393938. http://archive.rubicon-foundation.org/5514. Retrieved on 2009-03-05.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Look up first aid in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * First Aid Guide at the Mayo Clinic
  * First Aid References at the U.S.A. Center for Disease Control
  * First Aid at BBC Health
  * First Aid Project FirstAi.de (multilingual)

v â¢ d â¢ e

First aid  
Techniques

Airway management Â· Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Â· Emergency bleeding
control  
Equipment

Automated external defibrillator Â· Bag valve mask Â· Bandage Â· Dressing Â·
First aid kit Â· Nasopharyngeal airway Â· Oropharyngeal airway  
Mnemonics

ABC Â· OPQRST Â· PERRLA/EOMI Â· RICE Â· SAMPLE Â· SOAP  
Certifications

Certified first responder Â· Emergency medical technician Â· Wilderness
Emergency Medical Technician  
Topics

Bleeding Â· Golden hour Â· Good Samaritan law Â· Wilderness medicine  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Health Science > Medicine > Emergency medicine  
Procedures

Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) Â· Advanced life support (ALS) Â·
Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) Â· Basic life support (BLS) Â·
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) Â· First aid Â· Pediatric Advanced Life
Support (PALS) Â· Wilderness first aid  
Equipment

Ambulance Â· Bag valve mask (BVM) Â· Chest tube Â· Defibrillation (AED, ICD)
Â· Electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG) Â· Intraosseous infusion (IO) Â· Intravenous
therapy (IV) Â· Intubation Â· Litter Â· Nasopharyngeal airway (NPA) Â·
Oropharyngeal airway (OPA) Â· Pocket mask Â· Stretcher  
People

Certified first responder (CFR) Â· Emergency medical responder (EMR) Â·
Emergency medical technician (EMT) Â· Paramedic Â· Emergency physician Â·
Wilderness First Responder Â· Wilderness EMT  
Drugs

Atropine Â· Amiodarone Â· Epinephrine/Adrenaline Â· Magnesium Â· Bicarbonate
Â· Naloxone  
Other

Ambulance station Â· Golden hour Â· Emergency department Â· Emergency medical
services Â· Emergency psychiatry Â· Medical emergency Â· Search and rescue Â·
Trauma center Â· Triage  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Lifesaving and lifeguarding  
International standards bodies

International Lifesaving Federation Â· International Liaison Committee on
Resuscitation

Lifeguard on duty flag  
National societies

DLRG Â· Royal Life Saving Society Australia Â· Royal Life Saving Society of
Canada Â· Royal Life Saving Society UK Â· Royal Life Saving Society
Commonwealth Â· Surf Life Saving Australia Â· Surf Life Saving New Zealand Â·
United States Lifesaving Association Â· Wasserwacht  
Topics

Lifesaving Â· Lifeguard Â· Surf lifesaving Â· First aid Â· Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation Â· Drowning chain  
Awards

Bronze Medallion Â· Bronze Cross Â· National Lifeguard Service  
Equipment

Lifebuoy Â· Rescue buoy Â· Throw bag Â· Life saving reel Â· IRB Â· Surf ski  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First_aid"

Categories: First aid | Scoutcraft | Self-care

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * àªà«àªàª°àª¾àª¤à«
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 08:59.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



