
# Taxonomy

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the science of classifying living things, see alpha taxonomy.

<IMG>

Look up taxonomy in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Taxonomy is the practice and science of classification. The word finds its
roots in the Greek ÏÎ¬Î¾Î¹Ï, taxis (meaning 'order', 'arrangement') and
Î½ÏÎ¼Î¿Ï, nomos ('law' or 'science'). Taxonomy uses taxonomic units, known
as taxa (singular taxon).

In addition, the word is also used as a count noun: a taxonomy, or taxonomic
scheme, is a particular classification ("the taxonomy of ..."), arranged in a
hierarchical structure. Typically this is organised by subtype-supertype
relationships, also called parent-child relationships. In such a subtype-
supertype relationship the subtype kind of thing has by definition the same
constraints as the supertype kind of thing plus one or more additional
constraints. For example, car is a subtype of vehicle. So any car is also a
vehicle, but not every vehicle is a car. Therefore, a thing needs to satisfy
more constraints to be a car than to be a vehicle.

## Contents

  * 1 Applications
  * 2 Taxonomy and mental classification
  * 3 Various taxonomies
  * 4 Non-scientific taxonomies
  * 5 Military taxonomy
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 References
  * 8 See also
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Applications

Originally the term taxonomy referred only to the classifying of organisms
(now sometimes known as alpha taxonomy) or a particular classification of
organisms. However, it has become fashionable in certain circles to apply the
term in a wider, more general sense, where it may refer to a classification of
things or concepts, as well as to the principles underlying such a
classification.

Almost anything â animate objects, inanimate objects, places, concepts,
events, properties, and relationships â may be then classified according to
some taxonomic scheme. Wikipedia categories illustrate a taxonomy schema.[1]

In an even wider sense, the term taxonomy could also be applied to
relationship schemes other than parent-child hierarchies, such as network
structures with other types of relationships. Taxonomies may then include
single children with multi-parents, for example, "Car" might appear with both
parents "Vehicle" and "Steel Mechanisms"; to some however, this merely means
that 'car' is a part of several different taxonomies.[2] A taxonomy might also
be a simple organization of kinds of things into groups, or even an
alphabetical list. However, the term vocabulary is more appropriate for such a
list. In current usage within "Knowledge Management", taxonomies are seen as
less broad than ontologies as ontologies apply a larger variety of relation
types.[3]

Mathematically, a hierarchical taxonomy is a tree structure of classifications
for a given set of objects. It is also named Containment hierarchy. At the top
of this structure is a single classification, the root node, that applies to
all objects. Nodes below this root are more specific classifications that
apply to subsets of the total set of classified objects. The progress of
reasoning proceeds from the general to the more specific. In scientific
taxonomies, a conflative term is always a polyseme.[4]

In contrast, in a context of legal terminology, an open-ended contextual
taxonomy -- a taxonomy holding only with respect to a specific context. In
scenarios taken from the legal domain, a formal account of the open-texture of
legal terms is modeled, which suggests varying notions of the "core" and
"penumbra" of the meanings of a concept. The progress of reasoning proceeds
form the specific to the more general.[5]

## [edit] Taxonomy and mental classification

Some have argued that the adult human mind naturally organizes its knowledge
of the world into such systems. This view is often based on the epistemology
of Immanuel Kant. Anthropologists have observed that taxonomies are generally
embedded in local cultural and social systems, and serve various social
functions. Perhaps the most well-known and influential study of folk
taxonomies is Ãmile Durkheim's The Elementary Forms of Religious Life.

## [edit] Various taxonomies

Biological classification (sometimes known as "Linnaean taxonomy") is still
generally the best known form of taxonomy. It uses taxonomic ranks, including,
among others, (in order) Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order, Family, Genus, Species
(various mnemonic devices have been used to help people remember the list of
"Linnaean" taxonomic ranks. See Zoology mnemonic). In zoology, the
nomenclature for the more important ranks (superfamily to subspecies),
including the allowed number of ranks, is strictly regulated by the ICZN Code,
whereas there is more latitude for names at higher ranks. Taxonomy itself is
never regulated, but is always the result of research in the scientific
community. How researchers arrive at their taxa varies; depending on the
available data, and resources, methods vary from simple quantitative or
qualitative comparisons of striking features to elaborate computer analyses of
large amounts of DNA sequence data.

Today, the alternative to the traditional rank-based biological classification
is phylogenetic systematics (or "cladism"), which is based on cladistic
analyses exclusively, to yield a taxonomy reproducing the phylogenetic tree.
In cladism, taxa must always correspond to clades, which are discovered by
analysis of apomorphies (derived traits). The results are often represented as
cladograms. By comparison, although clades may be (and today usually are) used
as a basis for ranked taxa, there is no formal requirement for rank-based
taxonomy to correspond to the phylogenetic tree. The PhyloCode is a proposed
formal ruleswork for a phylogenetic taxonomy, similar to the ICZN Code, ICBN
etc. in rank-based nomenclature.

In numerical taxonomy, numerical phenetics or taximetrics, the taxonomy is
exclusively based on cluster analysis and neighbor joining to best-fit
numerical equations that characterize all measurable traits of a number of
organisms. It results in a measure of evolutionary "distance" between species,
averaged over all traits considered. This method has been largely superseded
by cladistic analyses today; it is liable to being misled by plesiomorphic
traits, which in phenetics are given equal weight to apomorphies.

## [edit] Non-scientific taxonomies

Other taxonomies, such as those analyzed by Durkheim and LÃ©vi-Strauss, are
sometimes called folk taxonomies to distinguish them from scientific
taxonomies that focus on evolutionary relationships rather than similarity in
habitus and habits. Though phenetics arguably places much emphasis on overall
similarity, it is a quantitative analysis that attempts to reproduce
evolutionary relationships of lineages and not similarities of form taxa.

The neologism folksonomy should not be confused with "folk taxonomy", though
it is obviously a portmanteau created from the two words. "Fauxonomy" (from
French faux, "false") is a pejorative neologism used to criticize folk
taxonomies for their lack of agreement with scientific findings. Baraminology
is a taxonomy used in creation science which in classifying form taxa
resembles folk taxonomies.

The phrase "enterprise taxonomy" is used in business to describe a very
limited form of taxonomy used only within one organization. An example would
be a certain method of classifying trees as "Type A", "Type B" and "Type C"
used only by a certain lumber company for categorising log shipments.

## [edit] Military taxonomy

Military theorist Carl von Clausewitz stressed the significance of grasping
the fundamentals of any situation in the "blink of an eye" (coup d'Åil). In a
military context, the astute tactician can immediately grasp a range of
implications and can begin to anticipate plausible and appropriate courses of
action.[6] Clausewitz' conceptual "blink" represents a tentative ontology
which organizes a set of concepts within a domain.

<IMG>

This article contains weasel words, vague phrasing that often accompanies
biased or unverifiable information. Such statements should be clarified or
removed. (March 2009)  
The term "military taxonomy" encompasses the domains of weapons, equipment,
organizations, strategies, and tactics.[7] The use of taxonomies in the
military extends beyond its value as an indexing tool or record-keeping
template[8] \-- for example, the taxonomy-model analysis suggests a useful
depiction of the spectrum of the use of military force in a political context.
[9]

A taxonomy of terms to describe various types of military operations is
fundamentally affected by the way all elements are defined and addressed --
not unlike framing. For example, in terms of a specific military operation, a
taxonomic approach based on differentiation and categorization of the entities
participating would produce results which were quite different from an
approach based on functional objective of an operation (such as peacekeeping,
disaster relief, or counter-terrorism).[10]

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Zirn, CÃ¤cilia, Vivi Nastase and Michael Strube. "Distinguishing Between Instances and Classes in the Wikipedia Taxonomy" (paper); (video lecture). 5th Annual European Semantic Web Conference (ESWC 2008).
  2. ^ Jackson, Joab. "Taxonomyâs not just design, itâs an art," Government Computer News (Washington, D.C.). September 2, 2004.
  3. ^ Suryanto, Hendra and Paul Compton. "Learning classification taxonomies from a classification knowledge based system." University of Karlsruhe; "Defining 'Taxonomy'," Straights Knowledge website.
  4. ^ Malone, Joseph L. (1988). The Science of Linguistics in the Art of Translation: Some Tools from Linguistics for the Analysis and Practice of Translation, p. 112.
  5. ^ Grossi, Davide, Frank Dignum and John-Jules Charles Meyer. (2005). "Contextual Taxonomies" in Computational Logic in Multi-Agent Systems, pp. 33-51.
  6. ^ Calusewitz, Carl. (1982). On War, p. 141; "Defining 'Taxonomy'," Straights Knowledge website.
  7. ^ Cycorp: Structured information
  8. ^ Fenske, Russell W. "A Taxonomy for Operations Research," Operations Research, Vol. 19, No. 1 (Jan.-Feb., 1971), pp. 224-234;] United Nations. "Taxonomy for Recordkeeping in Field Missions of UN Peacekeeping Operations." June 2006.
  9. ^ Cohen, Stuart A. and Efraim Inbar. "A taxonomy of Israel's use of military force," Journal Comparative Strategy, Vol. 10, No. 2 (April 1991), pp. 121 - 138.
  10. ^ Downie, Richard D. "Defining integrated operations," Joint Force Quarterly (Washington, D.C.). July, 2005.

## [edit] References

  * Carbonell, J. G. and J. Siekmann, eds. (2005). Computational Logic in Multi-Agent Systems, Vol. 3487. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 13-ISBN 978-3-540-28060-6
  * Clausewitz, Carl. (1982). On War (editor, Anatol Rapoport). New York: Penguin Classics. 10-ISBN 0-140-44427-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-140-44427-8
  * Malone, Joseph L. (1988). The Science of Linguistics in the Art of Translation: Some Tools from Linguistics for the Analysis and Practice of Translation. Albany, New York: State University of New York Press. 10-ISBN 0-887-06653-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-887-06653-5; OCLC 15856738

## [edit] See also

  * Bloom's Taxonomy
  * Carolus Linnaeus, the father of systematics
  * Categorization
  * Capital Market Taxonomy
  * Conflation
  * Cultigen taxonomy
  * Cultivated plant taxonomy
  * Celestial Emporium of Benevolent Recognition, a fictional Chinese encyclopedia with an "impossible" taxonomic scheme.
  * Chresonym
  * Cladistics, the most prominent of several forms of phylogenetic systematics
  * Folksonomy
  * Gellish English dictionary / Taxonomy, in which the concepts are arranged as a subtype-supertype hierarchy.
  * History of plant systematics
  * Hypernym
  * Jean-Baptiste Lamarck
  * Knowledge representation
  * Linnaean taxonomy
  * Nosology
  * Ontology
  * Phylogenetic
  * Biological classification
  * Sibley-Ahlquist taxonomy
  * SOLO Taxonomy
  * Species problem
  * Systematics
  * Taxocene
  * Lexicon

## [edit] External links

  * HjÃ¸rland: Scientific classification and taxonomy. IN: The epistemological Lifeboat
  * Wikispecies Main Page
  * Integrated Taxonomic Information System
  * Taxonomy Browser of National Center for Biotechnology Information
  * Library of Taxonomy Resources
  * Metadata? Thesauri? Taxonomies? Topic Maps! - Making sense of it all
  * Taxonomies & Controlled Vocabularies Special Interest Group of the American Society for Indexing
  * Consortium of European Taxonomic Facilities

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taxonomy"

Categories: Taxonomy | Classification systems | Greek loanwords

Hidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | Articles
with weasel words from March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Gaelg
  * Galego
  * ð²ð¿ðð¹ððº
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LÃ­guru
  * Limburgs
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Novial
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 23:55.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



