
# Wagashi

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sasayamashi Daihukudo

<IMG>

<IMG>

A selection of wagashi to be served during a Japanese tea ceremony.

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (February 2008)  
Wagashi (åèå­ ?) is a traditional Japanese confectionery which is often
served with tea, especially the types made of mochi, azuki bean paste, and
fruits.

Wagashi is typically made from natural based (mainly plant) ingredients. The
names used for wagashi commonly fit a formulaâa natural beauty and a word
from ancient literature; they are thus often written with hyÅgaiji (kanji
that are not commonly used or known), and are glossed with furigana.

Generally, confectioneries that were introduced from the West after the Meiji
Restoration (1868) are not considered wagashi. Most sorts of Okinawan
confectionery and those originating in Europe or China that use ingredients
alien to traditional Japanese cuisine, e.g., kasutera, are only rarely
referred to as wagashi.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Ancient
    * 1.2 Tang confectionery
    * 1.3 Introduction of tea
    * 1.4 Nanban confectionery
    * 1.5 Edo period
    * 1.6 In modern days
  * 2 Types of wagashi
    * 2.1 Classifications / Categories
  * 3 Availability
  * 4 Wagashi in fiction
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] History

<IMG> This section requires expansion.  
### [edit] Ancient

<IMG>

<IMG>

Grave of Emperor Suinin, Nara Prefecture.

In ancient Japan, people ate fruits and nuts as confectionery and sweets, to
supplement nutrition in addition to grain, such as rice, wheat and millet. In
an excavation of a JÅmon period archeological site, the carbonized remains of
what appeared to be baked cookies made from chestnut powder were discovered.

According to the Kojiki, Emperor Suinin ordered Tajima-mori to bring Tokijiku-
no-Kagu-no-Konomi (ç»å²å£«çè½è¿¦çè½æ¨å¯¦ ,a kind of orange?) from the
Eternal Land. 10 years later, Tajima-mori returned with the orange, but
Emperor Suinin was already dead. Tajima-mori mourned since he could not carry
out his mission and took his own life.[1] By tradition, Tajima-mori is
worshiped as spirit like a patron saint among confectionery craftsmen.

Grain processing technology evolved through rice cultivation. People began to
produce a parched rice (yaigome), sun-dried cooked rice (hoshi-ii), rice
flour, dumpling (dango), mochi, ame (made of saccharified rice malt) and so
on. Thus, ancient people's confectionery was very simple.

### [edit] Tang confectionery

Japan sent envoys to the Sui and Tang Dynasty from the Asuka period to the
beginning of the Heian period. They brought back eight Tang confectioneries
(åèå­ ,TÅ-gashi or kara-kudamono?) and 14 grain flour-based
confectioneries (æé¤  ?) and the recipes. The Tang confectioneries were
kneaded wheat flour and rice flour, and fried in oil. These were more advanced
than the confectionery technology of Japan in those days. They were served at
the Imperial Court and offered to Shintoist and Buddhist deities. According to
one view, a dark brown sugar was also brought back from China by Jianzhen who
came to Japan from the Tang in this period. However, since sugar-refining
technology was not introduced to Japan at this point, the sugar was very rare
and was treasured like a medicine. Generally, the syrup that resulted from
boiling the sap of Grape ivy down (çèç  ,amazura-sen?) was used as a
sweetener at this time.

During this period, many diaries and tales were written among upper class and
aristocrats. The Tale of Genji, The Pillow Book and The Diary of Izumi Shikibu
have some episodes about confectionery. Moreover, the records manifesting a
life situation also increased with improvement of a government
institution.[clarification needed] They are how we know confectionery culture
of those days.

  * Tang confectioneries 
    * Major eights: Baishi, Danki, Hichira, Kakko, Keishin, Tensei, TÅshi and Tsuishi.
    * Others: Buto, Fuzuku, Heidan, HÅtÅ (According to one theory, it is an archetype of HÅtÅ), Kakunawa, Konton, Magari, Mugikata and Sakuhei.
  * Aozashi: It is made of parched green wheat flour and twisted like a thread.
  * Kezurihi: Shaved ice flavored with amazura-sen syrup. It is called kakigori today.
  * Some mochi-based confectioneries. For example: 
    * Tsubaki mochii: A mochi flavored with amazura-sen syrup.
    * Inoko mochii: A mochi shaped as a wild boar piglet.

### [edit] Introduction of tea

See also: History of tea in Japan

The first introduction of tea in Japan is unclear. In 729, Emperor ShÅmu held
a ritual of the tea party after sutra recitation. In 815, Emperor Saga was
given a cup of tea by the high priest. During the Heian period it seems that
the customs of tea drinking had not been established outside of Temples and
Buddhism, and had not progressed into domestic culture. Therefore, the
standard introduction is in 1191, when the famous Zen priest Eisai brought
back tea seeds to Kyoto. Then, confectionery was improved as a snack or a
light meal to accompany tea.

In 1349, Rin JÅin (ææ·¨å  ?) who came from Yuan to Japan with a Zen
priest. He lived in Nara, and sold a steamed filled dumplings. However, since
meat eating was a taboo in Japan then, azuki bean paste sweetened with
honeysuckle syrup, was used as a replacement filling. This was very popular
and was presented to the Imperial Court repeatedly. Then, Rin married and was
naturalized in Japan. The manjÅ« store which he opened is still operating in
Tokyo as Shiose SÅ-honke (å¡©ç¬ç·æ¬å®¶ ?). Moreover, from 1949, Rin was
worshiped as ancestor of manjÅ« in Hayashi shrine in Nara.

### [edit] Nanban confectionery

In 1543, Portuguese were shipwrecked on Tanegashima Isle. Some European
confectioneries became popular in Japan during the Nanban trade. These were
referred to as nanban-gashi (åè®èå­ ?), or "Wagashi with a new wind".

In Japan, cattle are not common, therefore non-dairy based confectionery was
more popular, in particular castella, kompeito, aruheitÅ, karumera, keiran
sÅmen, bÅro and bisukauto.

### [edit] Edo period

During the Edo period, the production of sugarcane in Okinawa became highly
productive, and low quality brown sugar as well as heavily processed white
sugar became widely available. A type of sugar, wasanbon was perfected in this
period and is still used exclusively to make wagashi. Wagashi was a popular
gift between samurai, in significance much like a good wine. Wagashi is served
as part of a Japanese tea ceremony, and serving a good seasonal wagashi shows
one's educational background.

### [edit] In modern days

<IMG> This section requires expansion.  
## [edit] Types of wagashi

<IMG>

<IMG>

SeiÅbo, a peach-shaped wagashi

  * Anmitsu: chilled gelatinous cubes (kanten) with fruit.
  * AmanattÅ: simmered azuki beans or other beans with sugar, and dried. AmanattÅ and nattÅ are not related although the names are similar
  * Botamochi: a sweet rice ball wrapped with anko (or an, thick azuki bean paste).
  * Daifuku: general term for mochi (pounded sweet rice) stuffed with anko.
  * Dango: a small, sticky sweet mochi, commonly skewered on a stick.
  * Hanabiramochi: a flat red and white sweet mochi wrapped around anko and a strip of candied gobo (burdock).
  * Ikinari dango: a steamed bun with chunks of sweet potato in the dough, with anko in the center. It is a local confectionery in Kumamoto.
  * Imagawayaki (also kaitenyaki and so on): anko surrounded in a disc of fried dough covering.
  * Kusa mochi: "grass mochi", a sweet mochi infused with Japanese mugwort (yomogi), surrounding a center of anko.
  * Kuri hÅka (æ å®è¯ ?) a chestnut wrapped in yÅkan[2][3]
  * Kuri kinton: a sweetened mixture of boiled and mashed chestnuts.
  * ManjÅ«: steamed cakes of an surrounded by a flour mixture, available in many shapes such as peaches, rabbits, and matsutake (æ¾è¸) mushrooms.
  * Matsunoyuki: "the snow on the pine", a sweetened mochi in the shape of a pine tree, sprinkled with ground sugar.
  * Monaka: a center of anko sandwiched between two delicate and crispy sweet rice crackers.

<IMG> External images  
<IMG> Ofukuimo[4]  
<IMG> Ofukuimo[5]  
  * Ofukuimo (ãé¦¥è ?): sponge cake filled with sweet potato paste
  * Oshiruko (also zenzai): a hot dessert made from anko in a liquid, soup form, with small mochi floating in it.
  * Rakugan: a small, very solid and sweet cake which is made of rice flour and mizuame.
  * Sakuramochi: a rice cake filled with anko and wrapped in a pickled cherry leaf.

<IMG> External images  
<IMG> Shimizukage[6]  
<IMG> Shimizukage[7]  
  * Shimizukage (æ¸ æ°´ãã ?): a bean jelly (a kind of yÅkan); literally, shimizu means "spring water"
  * Taiyaki: like a kaitenyaki, a core of anko surrounded by a fried dough covering, but shaped like a fish.
  * UirÅ: a steamed cake made of rice flour and sugar, similar to mochi.
  * Warabimochi: a wagashi traditionally made from warabi and served with kinako and kuromitsu
  * Yatsuhashi: thin sheets of gyÅ«hi (sweetened mochi), available in different flavors, like cinnamon, and occasionally folded in a triangle around a ball of red anko.
  * YÅkan: one of the oldest wagashi, a solid block of anko, hardened with agar and additional sugar.

### [edit] Classifications / Categories

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Chaya or traditional Japanese teahouse, offers tea and wagashi. This example
is in Nara Park

Wagashi are classified according to the production method and moisture
content. Moisture content is very important since it affects the best-before
date.

  * Namagashi (çèå­ ?) (wet confectionery)âcontains 30% or more moisture. 
    * JÅ namagashi (ä¸çèå­ ?), very soft and delicate seasonally varying namagashi, in various, often elaborate, shapes and colors, often reflecting seasonal plants. Some stores will have many dozens over the course of a year.[8] (examples: [3] [4])
    * Mochi mono (ãã¡ç© ?)
    * Mushi mono (è¸ãç© ?)
    * Yaki mono (ç¼ãç© ?)
      * Hiranabe mono (å¹³ãªã¹ç© ?)
      * Åbun mono (ãªã¼ãã³ç© ?)
    * Nagashi mono (æµãç© ?)
    * Neri mono (ç·´ãç© ?)
    * Age mono (æãç© ?)

  * Han namagashi (åçèå­ ?) (half-wet confectionery)âcontains 10%â30% moisture. 
    * An mono (ããç© ?)
    * Oka mono (ããç© ?)
    * Yaki mono (ç¼ãç© ?)
      * Hiranabe mono (å¹³ãªã¹ç© ?)
      * Åbun mono (ãªã¼ãã³ç© ?)
    * Nagashi mono (æµãç© ?)
    * Neri mono (ç·´ãç© ?)

  * Higashi (å¹²èå­ ?) (dry confectionery)âcontains 10% or less moisture. 
    * Uchi mono (æã¡ç© ?)
    * Oshi mono (æ¼ãç© ?)
    * Kake mono (æãç© ?)
    * Yaki mono (ç¼ãç© ?)
    * Ame mono (ããç© ?)

## [edit] Availability

Wagashi is widely available in Japan, but quite rare outside it.

  * Minamoto Kitchoan (æº åå åºµ ?)
    Has a varied selection, and stores in New York City (shipping throughout the US), London (shipping throughout Europe), and Singapore, in addition to Japan.
  * Toraya (ã¨ãã ?)
    Has a full Paris store, stores in Japan, and sells a limited selection (yÅkan only) at New York stores.
  * Fugetsu-do
    Family owned and operated in the USA, since 1903, Fugetsu-do now ships anywhere in the USA.

## [edit] Wagashi in fiction

  * NHK aired a morning drama series called Asuka. The overall theme of the series is wagashi.
  * The male lead in the visual novel D.C.: Da Capo has the power to create wagashi, which he uses at various times in the game.

## [edit] See also

  * List of Japanese snack food
  * Hangwa (Korean equivalent to wagashi)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ ^ Chamberlain, B.H. (1882â1919) The Kojiki - translated by Basil Hall Chamberlain Public Domain (Published before copyright): SECT. LXXIV.--EMPEROR SUI-NIN.
  2. ^ Fuga assortment at Minamoto Kitchoan
  3. ^ Review of Minamoto Kitchoan's kuri hÅka (Japanese)
  4. ^ ãé¦¥è at Minamoto Kitchoan
  5. ^ [1]
  6. ^ [2]
  7. ^ From Minamoto Kitchoan: Japanese Wagashi- The Ultimate Intersection of Food and Art
  8. ^ http://www2.aia.pref.aichi.jp/voice/no7/kitchen1.html

  * Aoki, Naomi (2000). å³èª¬ åèå­ã®ä»æ Zusetsu wagashi no konjyaku. æ ªå¼ä¼ç¤¾æ·¡äº¤ç¤¾ Tankosha Publishing Co.,Ltd. ISBN 978-4473017628.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Wagashi  
  * (Japanese) Japan Wagashi Association
  * (English) TorayaâAn old wagashi maker dating back to late 16th century.
  * (Japanese) Shikisaikaâimages of wagashi
  * (Japanese) Wa-Gasi, a blog devoted to wagashi

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wagashi"

Categories: Wagashi | Japanese tea ceremony | Tea culture

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations | Articles containing
Japanese language text | Articles to be expanded since June 2008 | All
articles to be expanded | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles
needing clarification from March 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 22 February 2009, at 18:21.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



