
# Constructed wetland

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline
citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies.
(April 2008)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Vertical Flow Constructed Wetlands

A constructed wetland or wetpark is an artificial marsh or swamp, created for
anthropogenic discharge such as wastewater, stormwater runoff or sewage
treatment, and as habitat for wildlife, or for land reclamation after mining
or other disturbance. Natural wetlands act as biofilters, removing sediments
and pollutants such as heavy metals from the water, and constructed wetlands
can be designed to emulate these features.

## Contents

  * 1 Operation
  * 2 General contaminant removal
  * 3 Removal of nitrogen
    * 3.1 Organic nitrogen
    * 3.2 Ammonia (NH3) and ammonium (NH4+)
    * 3.3 Nitrogen removal in constructed wetlands used to treat domestic sewage
  * 4 Removal of phosphorus
    * 4.1 Incorporation into biomass
    * 4.2 Phosphorus retention by soils or root-bed media
    * 4.3 Phosphorus removal in constructed wetlands used to treat domestic sewage
  * 5 Set-up of commercial treatment ponds/combined treatment ponds construction in urban areas
    * 5.1 Design characteristics of the commercial systems
    * 5.2 Plants/organisms used in treatment ponds in commercial undertakings
  * 6 Finishing
  * 7 Literature citations
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Operation

Vegetation in a wetland provides a substrate (roots, stems, and leaves) upon
which microorganisms can grow as they break down organic materials. This
community of microorganisms is known as the periphyton. The periphyton and
natural chemical processes are responsible for approximately 90 percent of
pollutant removal and waste breakdown. The plants remove about seven to ten
percent of pollutants, and act as a carbon source for the microbes when they
decay. Different species of aquatic plants have different rates of heavy metal
uptake, a consideration for plant selection in a constructed wetland used for
water treatment.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Newly Planted Constructed Wetland

Constructed wetlands are of two basic types: subsurface-flow and surface-flow
wetlands. Subsurface-flow wetlands can be further classified as horizontal
flow and vertical flow constructed wetlands. Subsurface-flow wetlands move
effluent (agricultural or mining runoff, tannery or meat processing wastes,
wastewater from sewage or storm drains, or other water to be cleansed) through
a gravel lavastone or sand medium on which plants are rooted; surface-flow
wetlands move effluent above the soil in a planted marsh or swamp, and thus
can be supported by a wider variety of soil types including bay mud and other
silty clays. In subsurface-flow systems, the effluent may move either
horizontally, parallel to the surface, or vertically, from the planted layer
down through the substrate and out. Subsurface horizontal-flow wetlands are
less hospitable to mosquitoes, whose populations can be a problem in
constructed wetlands (carnivorous plants have been used to address this
problem). Subsurface-flow systems have the advantage of requiring less land
area for water treatment, but are not generally as suitable for wildlife
habitat as are surface-flow constructed wetlands.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The same constructed wetland two years later

Plantings of reedbeds are popular in European constructed wetlands, and plants
such as cattails or bulrushes (Typha spp.), sedges, water hyacinth and
Pontederia spp. are used worldwide. Recent research in use of constructed
wetlands for subarctic regions has shown that buckbeans (Menyanthes
trifoliata) and pendant grass (Arctophila fulva) are also useful for metals
uptake.

## [edit] General contaminant removal

Physical, chemical, and biological processes combine in wetlands to remove
contaminants from wastewater. An understanding of these processes is
fundamental not only to designing wetland systems but to understanding the
fate of chemicals once they have entered the wetland. Theoretically, treatment
of wastewater within a constructed wetland occurs as it passes through the
wetland medium and the plant rhizosphere. A thin aerobic film around each root
hair is aerobic due to the leakage of oxygen from the rhizomes, roots, and
rootlets.[1] Decomposition of organic matter is facilitated by aerobic and
anaerobic micro-organisms present. Microbial nitrification and subsequent
denitrification releases nitrogen as gas to the atmosphere. Phosphorus is
coprecipitated with iron, aluminum, and calcium compounds located in the root-
bed medium.[2][3] Suspended solids are filtered out as they settle in the
water column in surface flow wetlands or are physically filtered out by the
medium within subsurface flow wetland cells. Harmful bacteria and viruses are
reduced by filtration and adsorption by biofilms on the rock media in
subsurface flow and vertical flow systems.

## [edit] Removal of nitrogen

The dominant forms of nitrogen in wetlands that are of importance to
wastewater treatment include organic nitrogen, ammonia, ammonium, nitrate,
nitrite, and nitrogen gases. Inorganic forms are essential to plant growth in
aquatic systems but if scarce can limit or control plant productivity.[4] The
nitrogen entering wetland systems can be measured as organic nitrogen,
ammonia, nitrate and nitrite. Total Nitrogen refers to all nitrogen species.
The removal of nitrogen from wastewater is important because of ammoniaâs
toxicity to fish if discharged into water courses. Excessive levels of
nitrates in drinking water is thought to cause methemoglobinemia in infants,
which decreases the oxygen transport ability of the blood. The UK has
experienced a significant increase in nitrate concentration in groundwater and
rivers.[5]

### [edit] Organic nitrogen

Mitsch & Gosselink define nitrogen mineralisation as "the biological
transformation of organically combined nitrogen to ammonium nitrogen during
organic matter degradation".[6] This can be both an aerobic and anaerobic
process and is often referred to as ammonification. Mineralisation of
organically combined nitrogen releases inorganic nitrogen as nitrates,
nitrites, ammonia and ammonium, making it available for plants, fungi and
bacteria.[6] Mineralisation rates may be affected by oxygen levels in a
wetland.[3]

### [edit] Ammonia (NH3) and ammonium (NH4+)

The formation of ammonia (NH3) occurs via the mineralisation or ammonification
of organic matter under either anaerobic or aerobic conditions (Keeney, 1973).
The ammonium ion (NH4+) is the primary form of mineralized nitrogen in most
flooded wetland soils. The formation of this ion occurs when ammonia combines
with water as follows:

NH3 \+ H2O <\-----> NH4+ \+ OH-  
[6]

Upon formation, several pathways are available to the ammonium ion. It can be
absorbed by the plants and algae and converted back into organic matter, or
the ammonium ion can be electrostatically held on negatively charged surfaces
of soil particles.[6] At this point, the ammonium ion can be prevented from
further oxidation because of the anaerobic nature of wetland soils. Under
these conditions the ammonium ion is stable and it is in this form that
nitrogen predominates in anaerobic sediments typical of wetlands (Brock &
Madigan, 1991; ).[3]

Most wetland soils have a thin aerobic layer at the surface. As an ammonium
ion from the anaerobic sediments diffuses upward into this layer it is
converted to nitrite or nitrified (Klopatek, 1978). An increase in the
thickness of this aerobic layer results in an increase in nitrification.[3]
This diffusion of the ammonium ion sets up a concentration gradient across the
aerobic-anaerobic soil layers resulting in further nitrification reactions
(Klopatek, 1978).[3]

Nitrification is the biological conversion of organic and inorganic
nitrogenous compounds from a reduced state to a more oxidized state.[7]
Nitrification is strictly an aerobic process in which the end product is
nitrate (NO3-); this process is limited when anaerobic conditions prevail.[3]
Nitrification will occur readily down to 0.3 ppm dissolved oxygen (Keeney,
1973). The process of nitrification (1) oxidizes ammonium (from the sediment)
to nitrite (NO2-), and then (2) nitrite is oxidized to nitrate (NO3-). The
overall nitrification reactions are as follows:

(1) 2 NH4+ \+ 3 O2 <\----> 4 H+ \+ 2 H2O + 2 NO2-  

    
            (2)  2 NO2- + O2     <----> 2 NO3-  
    (Davies & Hart, 1990)
    
Two different bacteria are required to complete this oxidation of ammonium to
nitrate. Nitrosomonas sp. oxidizes ammonium to nitrite via reaction (1) , and
Nitrobacter sp. oxidizes nitrite to nitrate via reaction (2) (Keeney, 1973).

Denitrification is the biochemical reduction of oxidized nitrogen anions,
nitrate (NO3-) and nitrite (NO2-) to produce the gaseous products nitric oxide
(NO), nitrous oxide (N2O) and nitrogen gas (N2), with concomitant oxidation of
organic matter.[7] The general sequence is as follows:

NO3- \---> NO2- \---> NO ---> N2O ---> N2

The end products, N2O and N2 are gases that re-enter the atmosphere.
Denitrification occurs intensely in anaerobic environments but will also occur
in aerobic conditions (Bandurski, 1965). A deficiency of oxygen causes certain
bacteria to use nitrate in place of oxygen as an electron acceptor for the
reduction of organic matter.[3] The process of denitrification is restricted
to a narrow zone in the sediment immediately below the aerobic-anaerobic soil
interface (Nielson et al., 1990).[6] Denitrification is considered by
Richardson et al. (1978) to be the predominant microbial process that modifies
the chemical composition of nitrogen in a wetland system and the major process
whereby elemental nitrogen is returned to the atmosphere.[3] To summarize, the
nitrogen cycle is completed as follows: ammonia in water, at or near neutral
pH is converted to ammonium ions; the aerobic bacterium Nitrosomonas sp.
oxidizes ammonium to nitrite; Nitrobacter sp. then converts nitrite to
nitrate. Under anaerobic conditions, nitrate is reduced to relatively harmless
nitrogen gas, that is given off to the atmosphere.

### [edit] Nitrogen removal in constructed wetlands used to treat domestic
sewage

In a review of 19 surface flow wetlands (US EPA, 1988) it was found that
nearly all reduced total nitrogen. In a review of both surface flow and
subsurface flow wetlands Reed (1995) concluded that effluent nitrate
concentration is dependent on maintaining anoxic conditions within the wetland
so that denitrification can occur. He found that subsurface flow wetlands were
superior to surface flow wetlands for nitrate removal. The 20 surface flow
wetlands reviewed reported effluent nitrate levels below 5 mg/L; the 12
subsurface flow wetlands reviewed reported effluent nitrate ranging from <1 to
< 10 mg/L. Results obtained from the Niagara-On-The-Lake vertical flow systems
show a significant reduction in both total nitrogen and ammonia (> 97%) when
primary treated effluent was applied at a rate of 60L/mÂ²/day. Calculations
made showed that over 50% of the total nitrogen going into the system was
converted to relatively harmless nitrogen gas. Effective removal of nitrate
from the sewage lagoon influent was dependent on medium type used within the
vertical cell as well as water table level within the cell (Lemon et
al.,1997).

## [edit] Removal of phosphorus

Phosphorus occurs naturally in both organic and inorganic forms. The
analytical measure of biologically available orthophosphates is referred to as
soluble reactive phosphorus (SR-P). Dissolved organic phosphorus and insoluble
forms of organic and inorganic phosphorus are generally not biologically
available until transformed into soluble inorganic forms.[6]

In freshwater aquatic ecosystems phosphorus has been described as the major
limiting nutrient. Under undisturbed natural conditions, phosphorus is in
short supply. The natural scarcity of phosphorus is demonstrated by the
explosive growth of algae in water receiving heavy discharges of phosphorus-
rich wastes. Because phosphorus does not have an atmospheric component as does
nitrogen, the phosphorus cycle can be characterized as closed. The removal and
storage of phosphorus from wastewater can only occur within the constructed
wetland itself. According to Mitsch and Gosselink phosphorus may be
sequestered within a wetland system by the following:

  1. The binding of phosphorus in organic matter as a result of incorporation into living biomass,
  2. Precipitation of insoluble phosphates with ferric iron, calcium, and aluminum found in wetland soils.[6]

### [edit] Incorporation into biomass

Higher plants in wetland systems may be viewed as transient nutrient storage
compartments absorbing nutrients during the growing season and releasing large
amounts at senescence (Guntensbergen, 1989).[8] Generally, plants from
nutrient-rich habitats accumulate more nutrients than plants found in
nutrient-poor habitats, a phenomenon referred to as luxury uptake of nutrients
(Guntensbergen, 1989; Kadlec, 1989). Aquatic vegetation may play an important
role in phosphorus removal and, if harvested, extend the life of a system by
postponing phosphorus saturation of the sediments (Breen, 1990; Guntensbergen,
1989; Rogers et al., 1991). According to Sloey et al. (1978) vascular plants
may account for only a small amount of phosphorus uptake with only 5 to 20% of
the nutrients detained in a natural wetland being stored in harvestable plant
material. Bernard and Solsky also reported relatively low phosphorus
retention, estimating that a sedge (Carex sp.) wetland retained 1.9 g of
phosphorus per square metre of wetland.[8] Bulrushes (Scirpus sp.) in a
constructed wetland system receiving secondarily treated domestic wastes
contained 40.5% of the total phosphorus influent. The remaining 59.0% was
found to be stored in the gravel substratum (Sloey et al., 1978). Phosphorus
removal in a surface flow wetland treatment system planted with one of Scirpus
sp., Phragmites sp. or Typha sp. was investigated by Finlayson and Chick
(1983).

Phosphorus removal of 60%, 28%, and 46% were found for Scirpus sp., Phragmites
sp. and Typha sp. respectively. More recent work by Breen (1990) may prove
this to be a low estimate. His work on an artificial wetland indicated that
vascular plants are a major phosphorus storage compartment accounting for
67.3% of the influent phosphorus. Thut (1989) attributed plant adsorption with
80% phosphorus removal.

Only a small proportion (<20%) of phosphate removal by constructed wetlands
can be attributed to nutritional uptake by bacteria, fungi and algae (Moss,
1988). Swindell et al., (1990) found that the lack of seasonal fluctuation in
phosphorus removal rates suggests that the primary mechanism is bacterial and
alga fixation. However, Richardson (1985) dismisses this mechanism as
temporary saying that although the initial removal of dissolved inorganic
phosphorus from the water under natural loading levels is due largely to
microbial uptake and adsorption, the microbial pool is small and quickly
becomes saturated at which point the soil medium takes over as the major
contributor to phosphate removal.

There are more indirect ways in which plants contribute to wastewater
purification. Plants create a unique environment at the attachment surface of
the biofilm. Certain plants transport oxygen which is released at the
biofilm/root interface perhaps adding oxygen to the wetland system (Pride et
al., 1990). Plants also increase soil or other root-bed medium hydraulic
conductivity. As roots and rhizomes grow they are thought to disturb and
loosen the medium increasing its porosity which may allow more effective fluid
movement in the rhizosphere. When roots decay they leave behind ports and
channels known as macropores which are effective in channeling water through
the soil (Conley et al., 1991).

Whether or not wetland systems act as a phosphorus sink or source seems to
depend on system characteristics such as sediment and hydrology. Kramer et
al., (1972) indicated that there seems to be a net movement of phosphorus into
the sediment in many lakes. In Lake Erie as much as 80% of the total
phosphorus is removed from the waters by natural processes and is presumably
stored in the sediment. According to Klopatek (1978) marsh sediments high in
organic matter act as sinks. He has also shown that phosphorus release from a
marsh exhibits a cyclical pattern. Much of the spring phosphorus release comes
from high phosphorus concentrations locked up in the winter ice covering the
marsh; in summer the marsh acts as a phosphorus sponge. Simpson (1978) found
that phosphorus was exported from the system following dieback of vascular
plants. It has been demonstrated by Klopatek (1978) that phosphorus
concentrations in water are reduced during the growing season due to plant
uptake but decomposition and subsequent mineralisation of organic matter
releases phosphorus over the winter and accounts for the higher winter
phosphorus concentrations in the marsh (Klopatek, 1978;).[6]

### [edit] Phosphorus retention by soils or root-bed media

Two types of phosphate retention mechanisms may occur in soils or root-bed
media: chemical adsorption onto the medium (Hsu, 1964) and physical
precipitation of the phosphate ion (Faulkner and Richardson, 1989). Both
result from the attraction between phosphate ion and ions of Al, Fe or Ca
(Hsu, 1964; Cole et al., 1953) and terminates with formation of various iron
phosphates (Fe-P), aluminum phosphates (Al-P) or calcium phosphates (Ca-P)
(Fried and Dean, 1955).

Redox potential (Eh) of soil or water is a measure of its ability to reduce or
oxidize chemical substances and may range between -300 and +300 millivolts
(mV) (Hammer, 1992). Though the oxidation state of phosphorus is unaffected by
redox reactions, the redox potential is important because of Fe reduction.
Severely reduced conditions in the sediments may result in phosphorus release
(Mann, 1990). Typical wetland soils may have an Eh of -200 mV (Hammer, 1992).
Under these reduced conditions Fe3+ (Ferric iron) may be reduced to Fe2+
(Ferrous iron) and may release the bound phosphate ion back into solution
(Faulkner and Richardson, 1989; Sah and Mikkelson, 1986). The introduction of
oxygen causes the Fe2+ to be oxidized to Fe3+ producing a simultaneous
reduction of phosphate.[7] The solubility of phosphorus may be affected by the
amount of oxygen present in the sediment because saturation by water and
subsequent loss of oxygen generally cause wetland soils to have negative redox
potentials (Hammer, 1992). A well documented occurrence in the hypolimnion of
lakes is the release of soluble phosphorus when conditions become anaerobic
(Burns & Ross, 1972; Williams & Mayer, 1972). This phenomenon also occurs in
natural wetlands (Gosselink & Turner, 1978) and Kramer et al., (1972) report
that oxygen concentrations of less than 2.0 mg/l result in the release of
phosphorus from sediments.

### [edit] Phosphorus removal in constructed wetlands used to treat domestic
sewage

Adsorption to binding sites within the sediments was identified as the major
phosphorus removal mechanism in the surface flow constructed wetland system at
Port Perry, Ontario (Snell, unpublished data). Release of phosphorus from the
sediments occurred when anaerobic conditions prevailed. The lowest wetland
effluent phosphorus levels occurred when oxygen levels of the overlying water
column were above 1.0 mg / L. Removal efficiencies for total phosphorus were
54-59% with mean effluent levels of 0.38 mg P/L. Wetland effluent phosphorus
concentration was higher than influent levels during the winter months.

Lantzke et al., (1999) investigated phosphorus removal in a VF wetland in
Australia and found that the quantity of phosphorus removed over a short term
was stored in the following wetland components in order of decreasing
importance: substratum> macrophyte >biofilm but over the long term phosphorus
storage was located in macrophyte> substratum>biofilm components. They also
found that medium iron-oxide adsorption provides additional removal for some
years.

Mann (1990) investigated the phosphorus removal efficiency of two large-scale,
surface flow wetland systems in Australia which had a gravel substratum. He
then compared these results to laboratory phosphorus adsorption experiments.
For the first two months of wetland operation the mean phosphorus removal
efficiency of system 1 and 2 was 38% and 22%, respectively. Over the first
year a decline in removal efficiencies occurred. During the second year of
operation release of phosphorus from the system was often recorded such that
more phosphorus came out than was put in. This release was attributed to the
saturation of phosphorus binding sites. Close agreement was found between the
phosphorus adsorption capacity of the gravel as determined in the laboratory
and the adsorption capacity recorded in the field.

The phosphorus adsorption capacity of a subsurface flow constructed wetland
system containing a predominantly quartz gravel was investigated by Breen
(1990). The adsorption characteristics of this gravel as determined by
laboratory adsorption experiments and using the Langmuir adsorption isotherm
was 25 mg P / g gravel. Close agreement between calculated and realized
phosphorus adsorption was found. Because of the poor adsorption capacity of
the quartz gravel, plant uptake and subsequent harvesting were identified as
the major phosphorus removal mechanism.[9]

## [edit] Set-up of commercial treatment ponds/combined treatment ponds
construction in urban areas

<IMG>

<IMG>

The 3 treatment set-ups mostly employed

As previously mentioned, 3 types of reedbed-set ups are used. All these
systems are used in commercial systems (usually together with septic
tanks).[10] The system again are:

  * Surface flow (SF) reedbeds
  * Sub Surface Flow (SSF) reedbeds
  * Vertical Flow (VF) reedbeds

All three types of reed beds are placed in a closed basin with a substrate.
Also, for most commercial undertakings (eg agricultural enterprises), the
bottom is covered with a rubber foil (to ensure that the whole is completely
waterproof, which is essential in urban areas). The substrate can be either
gravel, sand or lavastone.

### [edit] Design characteristics of the commercial systems

<IMG>

<IMG>

A water-purifying pond, planted with Iris pseudacorus

Surface flow reed beds are characterised by the horizontal flow of wastewater
between the roots of the plants. They are no longer used as much due to the
land-area requirements to purify water for a single person (20 mÂ²), and the
increased smell and poor purification in winter.[10]

With subsurface flow reedbeds, the flow of wastewater occurs between the roots
of the plants itself (and not at the water surface). As a result the system is
more efficient, less odorous and less sensitive to winter conditions. Also,
less area is needed to purify water for a single person (5-10 mÂ²). A downside
to the system are the intakes, which can clog easily.[10]

Vertical flow reed beds are very similar to subsurface flow reed beds
(subsurface wastewater flow is present here as well), according comparable
advantages in efficiency and winter hardiness. The wastewater is divided at
the bottom with the assistance of a pump. Other than the 2 previous systems,
this system makes almost exclusive use of fine sand to increase bacteria
counts. Intake of oxygen into the water is also better, and pumping is pulsed
to reduce obstructions within the intakes. Through the increased efficiency,
only 3 mÂ² of space is needed to purify the water for one person.[10]

### [edit] Plants/organisms used in treatment ponds in commercial undertakings

See also: Organisms used in water purification

Usually, Common reed or Phragmites australis are used in treatment ponds (eg
in greywater treatment systems to purify wastewater). In self-purifying water
reservoirs(used to purify rainwater) however, certain other plants are used as
well. These reservoirs firstly need to be dimensioned to be filled with 1/4th
of lavastone and water-purifying plants to purify a certain water
quantity.[11]

The water-purifying plants used include a wide variety of plants, depending on
the local climate and geographical location. Plants are usually chosen which
are indigenous in that location for ecological reasons and optimum workings of
the system. In addition to water-purifying (de-nutrifying) plants, plants that
supply oxygen, and shade are also added in to allow a complete ecosystem to
form. Finally, in addition to plants, locally grown bacteria and non-predatory
fish are also added to eliminate pests. The bacteria are usually grown locally
by submerging straw in water and allowing it to form bacteria (arriving from
the surrounding atmosphere). The plants used (placed on an area 1/4th of the
water mass) are divided in 4 separate water depth-zones; knowingly:

  1. A water-depth zone from 0-20cm; Iris pseudacorus, Sparganium erectum, ... may be placed here (temperate climates)
  2. A water-depth zone from 40-60cm; Stratiotes aloides, Hydrocharis morsus-ranae, ... may be placed here (temperate climates)
  3. A water-depth zone from 60-120cm; Nymphea alba, ... my be placed here (temperate climates)
  4. A submerged water-depth zone; Myriophyllum spicatum, ... may be placed here (temperate climates)

Finally, 3 types of (non-predatory) fish (surface; bottom and ground-swimmers)
are chosen. This is to ensure that the fish may 'get along'. Examples of the 3
types of fish (for temperate climates) are:

  * Surface swimming fish: Leuciscus leuciscus, Leuciscus idus, Scardinius erythrophthalmus, ...
  * Middle-swimmers: Rutilus rutilus, ...
  * Bottom-swimming fish: Tinca tinca, ...

The plants are usually grown on coconut fibre growing medium.[12] At the time
of implantation to water-purifying ponds, de-nutrified soil is used to prevent
the possible growth of algae and unwanted organisms.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Flowforms in treatment pond in Norway

## [edit] Finishing

Finally, also worth mentioning are the hybrid systems. These are systems that
for example aerate the water after the final reedbed using cascades such as
Flowforms before holding the water in a shallow pond.[13] Also, primary
treatments as septic tanks, and different types of pumps as grinder pumps may
also be added.[14]

## [edit] Literature citations

  * Bhamidimarri, R. and A. Shilton and I. Armstrong and P. Jacobsen and D. Scarlet. 1991. Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment: the New Zealand experience. Wat. Sci. Tech. 24:247-253.

Bowmer, K.H. 1987. Nutrient removal from effluents by an artificial wetland:
influence of rhizosphere aeration and preferential flow studied using bromide
and dye tracers. Wat. Res. 21:591-599.

Brix, H. and H. Schierup. 1989. Danish experience with sewage treatment in
constructed wetlands. Pp.565-573. In Constructed wetlands for wastewater
treatment. D.A. Hammer, ed. Lewis publishers, Chelsea, Michigan.

Breen, P.F. 1990. A mass balance method for assessing the potential of
artificial wetlands for wastewater treatment. Wat. Res. 24:689-697.

Brix, Hans. 1994. Use of constructed wetlands in water pollution control:
Historical development, present status, and future perspectives. Wat. Sci.
Tech. Vol. 30 No. 8. pp. 209 - 223.

Burgoon, P.S. and K.R. Reddy and T.A. DeBusk. 1989. Domestic wastewater
treatment using emergent plants cultured in gravel and plastic substrates.
Pp.536-541. In Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment. D.A. Hammer, ed.
Lewis publishers, Chelsea, Michigan.

Burgoon, P.S. and K.R. Reddy and T.A. DeBusk. 1991. Vegetated submerged beds
with artificial substrates. II: N and P removal. Journ of Env. Eng. 117 # 4
:408 - 422.

Burns, N.M. and C. Ross. 1972. Oxygen-nutrient relationships within the
central basin of lake Erie. Pp.193-250. In Nutrients in natural waters. John
Wiley and Sons, Toronto.

Cole, C.V. and S.R. Olsen and C.O. Scott. 1953. The nature of phosphate
sorption by calcium carbonate. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. Proc. 410:352-356.

Conway, T.E. and J. M. Murtha. 1989. The Iselin marsh pond meadow. Pp. 139-
140. In Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment. D.A. Hammer, ed. Lewis
publishers, Chelsea, Michigan.

Davies, T.H. and B.T. Hart. 1990. Use of aeration to promote nitrification in
reed beds treating wastewater. Adv. Wat. Poll. Control. 11:77-84.

Faulkner, S.P. and C.J. Richardson. 1989. Physical and chemical
characteristics of freshwater wetland soils. Pp. 41-131. In Constructed
wetlands for wastewater treatment. D.A. Hammer, ed. Lewis publishers, Chelsea,
Michigan.

Finlayson, M.C. and A.J. Chick. 1983. Testing the significance of aquatic
plants to treat abattoir effluent. Wat. Res. 17:15-422.

Fried, M. and L.A. Dean. 1955. Phosphate retention by iron and aluminum in
cation exchange systems. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. Proc. __: 143- 47.

Gosselink, J.G. and R.E. Turner. 1978. The role of hydrology in freshwater
wetland ecosystems. Pp.63-78. Freshwater wetlands, ecological processes and
management potential. R.E. Good, and D.F. Whigham, R.L. Simpson, eds. Academic
press, New York.

Guntensbergen, G.R. and F. Stearns, and J.A. Kadlec. 1989. Wetland vegetation.
Pp.73-88. In Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment. D.A. Hammer, ed.
Lewis publishers, Chelsea, Michigan.

Hammer, D.A. 1992. Creating freshwater wetlands. Lewis publishers, Inc.
Chelsea, MI. p. 298.

Hammer, D.A. and R.K. Bastion. 1989. Wetlands ecosystems: Natural water
purifiers? Pp.5-20. In Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment. D.A.
Hammer, ed. Lewis publishers, Chelsea, Michigan.

Herskowitz, J. 1986. Listowell artificial marsh project report. Ontario
Ministry of the Environment project no. 128 RR, p. 253.

Hammer, D.A. and R.K. Bastian. Wetland ecosystems: Natural water purifiers?
Pp. 5- 20. In Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment. D.A. Hammer, ed.
Lewis publishers, Chelsea, Michigan.

Hsu, P.H. 1964. Adsorption of phosphate by aluminum and iron in soils. Soil
Sci. Soc. Proc. 9:474-478.

Jenssen, P.D., T. Maehlum, T. Zhu and W.S. Warner. 1992. Cold-climate
constructed wetlands. JORDFORSK Centre for Soil and Environmental Research,
N-1432 Aas, Norway.

Kadlec, R.H. 1989. Hydrologic factors in wetland water treatment. Pp. 21- 40.
In Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment. D.A. Hammer, ed. Lewis
publishers, Chelsea, Michigan.

Kadlec, R. H. 1995. Wetland treatment at Listowel (revisited). unpublished.

Klopatek, J.M. 1978. Nutrient dynamics of Freshwater Riverine marshes and the
role of emergent macrophytes. Pp.195-217. In Freshwater wetlands, ecological
processes and management potential. R.E. Good, and D.F. Whigham, R.L. Simpson,
eds. Academic Press, New York.

Kotz, J.C. and K.F. Purcell. 1987. Chemistry and chemical reactivity. CBS
College Publishing. New York, N.Y.G1

Kramer, J.R., and S.E. Herbes, and H.E. Allen. 1972. Phosphorus: analysis of
water, biomass, and sediment. Pp.51-101. In Nutrients in natural waters. John
Wiley and Sons, Toronto.

Lantzke, I.R., D.S. Mitchell, A.D. Heritage and K.P. Sharma. 1999. A model
controlling orthophosphate removal in planted vertical flow wetlands.
Ecological Engineering. 12:93-105.

Lemon, E. R. and I.D. Smith.1993. Sewage waste amendment marsh process
(SWAMP). Interim report, October, 1993. Unpublished.

Lemon, E.R., G. Bis., T Braybrook, L. Rozema and I. Smith. 1997. . Sewage
waste amendment marsh process (SWAMP). Final report.

Mann, R.A. 1990. Phosphorus removal by constructed wetlands: substratum
adsorption. Adv Wat. Poll. Control. 11:97-105.

Moss, B. 1988. Ecology of freshwater. Blackball Scientific Publishers, London.
417p.

Nichols, D.S. and D.H. Boelter. 1982. Treatment of secondary sewage with a
peat-sand filter bed. J. Environ. Qual. Vol. 11, No. 1.

Niering, W.A. 1988. Wetlands: Audubon society nature guide. Random House of
Canada Limited. Toronto. p. 638.

Ontario Ministry of the Environment. 1994. Storm water management practices
planning and design manual. Queen's Printer for Ontario. O.B.C. - Ontario
Building Code Act, S.O. 1992, c.23, Part 8, Sewage Systems pp. 8-14.

Rozema, L.R. , G.N. Bis, T. Braybrook, E, R, Lemon and I. Smith. 1996.
Retention of phosphorus in a Sub-surface flow constructed wetland. Presented
at: The 31st central Canadian symposium on water pollution research,
Burlington, Ontario.

Reddy, K.R. and W.F. DeBusk. 1987. Nutrient storage capabilities of aquatic
and wetland plants. In Aquatic plants for water treatment and resource
recovery. K.R. Reddy and W.H. Smith (Eds.). Magnolia Publishing Inc.

Reed, S.C. 1986. Wetlands as effluent treatment systems. Pp. 207-219. In
Appropriate Wastewater Management Technologies for Rural Areas Under Adverse
Conditions. Tech Press. Halifax, N.S.

Reed, S.C. 1991. Constructed Wetlands for Wastewater Treatment. BioCycle,
January:44-49.

Reed, S.C. 1995. Natural systems for waste management and treatment. McGraw
Hill, Inc.

Reed, S.C. and D. Brown. 1995. Subsurface flow wetlands - a performance
evaluation. Wat. Env. Res. 67:244 - 248.

Rogers, K.H. and P.F. Breen, and A.J. Chick. 1991. Nitrogen removal in
experimental wetland treatment systems: evidence for the role of aquatic
plants. Res. J. Water Polit.. Control Fed. 63:934-941.

Sah, R.N. and D. Mikkelson. 1986. Transformations of inorganic phosphorus
during the flooding and draining cycles of soil. Am. J. Soil Soc.50: 62-67.

Simpson, R.L. and D.F. Whigham. 1978. Seasonal patterns of nutrient movement
in a freshwater tidal marsh. Pp.243-257. In Freshwater wetlands, ecological
processes and management potential. R.E. Good, and D.F. Whigham, R.L. Simpson,
eds. Academic Press, New York.

Sloey, W.E. and F.L. Spangler, and C.W. Fetter, Jr. 1978. Management of
freshwater wetlands For nutrient assimilation. Pp. 321-340. In Freshwater
wetlands, ecological processes and management potential. R.E. Good, and D.F.
Whigham, R.L. Simpson, eds. Academic Press, New York.

Smith, I. G.N. Bis, E.R. Lemon and L.R. Rozema. 1997. A thermal analysis of a
vertical flow constructed wetland. Wat. Sci. Tech. 35:55-62.

Snell, D. 1990. Port Perry artificial marsh sewage treatment system.
unpublished report.

Steiner, R.S. and R.J. Freeman. Configuration and substrate design
considerations for constructed wetlands wastewater treatment. Pp.363-377. In
Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment. D.A. Hammer, ed. Lewis
Publishers, Chelsea, Michigan.

Tanner, C. C., J. S. Clayton and M.P. Upsdell. 1995. Effect of loading rate
and planting on treatment of dairy farm wastewaterâs in constructed wetlands
- II. removal of nitrogen phosphorus. Wat. Res. 29:27-34.

Thut, N.R. 1989. Utilisation of artificial marshes for treatment of pulp mill
effluents, Pp.239-251. In Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment. D.A.
Hammer, ed. Lewis Publishers, Chelsea, Michigan.

United States environmental protection agency. 1988. Design manual:
constructed wetlands and aquatic plant systems for municipal wastewater
treatment. EPA/625/1- 88/022. p. 83.

Watson, J.T., and S.C. Reed, and R.H. Kadlec, and R.L. Knight, and A.E.
Whitehouse. Performance expectations and loading rates for constructed
wetlands. Pp.319-353. In Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment. D.A.
Hammer, ed. Lewis publishers, Chelsea, Michigan.

Weber, L.R. 1990. Ontario soils. Physical, chemical and biological properties
and soil management practices. By the Faculty and Staff of the Department of
Land Resources Science. Ontario Agricultural College. University of Guelph.
Guelph, Ontario. A reprint of Ontario Soils.

Williams, J.D.H. and T. Mayer. 1972. Effects of sediment diagenesis and
regeneration of phosphorus with special reference to lakes Erie and Ontario.
Pp. 281-315. In Nutrients in natural waters. John Wiley and Sons, Toronto.

## [edit] See also

  * Biofilter
  * Bioswale
  * Ecological sanitation
  * Folkewall
  * John Todd (biologist)
  * Reedbed
  * Lava filter
  * Beaver pond

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Hammer, 1989
  2. ^ Brix and Schierup, 1989; Davies and Hart, 1990; Fried and Dean,1955; Sah and Mikkelson, 1986
  3. ^ a b c d e f g h Patrick, W.H. Jr. and K.R. Reddy. 1976. Nitrification-denitrification in flooded soils and water bottoms: dependence on oxygen supply and ammonium diffusion. Journal of Environmental. Quality. 5:469-472.
  4. ^ Mitsch & Gosselink, 1993
  5. ^ Gray, N.F. 1989. Biology of wastewater treatment. Oxford University Press, New York. p. 828.
  6. ^ a b c d e f g h Mitsch, J.W. and J.G. Gosselink. 1986. Wetlands. Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York. p. 536.
  7. ^ a b c Wetzel, R.G. 1983. Limnology. Pp. 255-297. Saunders college publishing. Orlando, Florida.
  8. ^ a b Bernard, J.M. and B.A. Solsky. 1976. Nutrient cycling in a Carex lacustris wetland. Can. J. Bot. 55:630-638.
  9. ^ Lloyd R. Rozema, M.Sc. (excerpt form Master of Science thesis, Brock University, St. Catharines, ON, 2000)
  10. ^ a b c d van Oirschot, Dion; Zaakvoerder RietLand, Poppel (2002-10-23) (in German). Certificering van plantenwaterzuiveringssystemen. http://www.certipro.be/docs/Certificering%20van%20plantenwaterzuiveringssystemen.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-18.
  11. ^ "Lava Filters". http://www.stowa-selectedtechnologies.nl/Sheets/Sheets/Lava.Filters.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-18.
  12. ^ Coconut growing medium used for water purifying plants
  13. ^ [1] Reedbed and Flowform cascade polishing, Sheepdrove Organic Farm, England
  14. ^ Pictures of hybrid reed bed systems

  * University of Alaska Agriculture and Forestry Station (2005). "Wetlands and wastewater treatment in Alaska". Agroborealis 36 (2). http://www.uaf.edu/snras/afes/pubs/misc/MP_05_02.pdf.
  * Cole, Stephen (1998). "The emergence of treatment wetlands". Environmental Science & Technology 32 (9): 218â223. http://pubs.acs.org/hotartcl/est/98/may/emer.html.
  * Gelt, Joe (1997). "Constructed Wetlands: Using Human Ingenuity, Natural Processes to Treat Water, Build Habitat". ARROYO 9 (4). http://ag.arizona.edu/AZWATER/arroyo/094wet.html.

## [edit] External links

  * American Society of Professional Wetland Engineers a wiki on wetland restoration for habitat and treatment
  * Aqua Treatment Technologies a Canadian company specializing in the design and installation of constructed wetlands, contains actual performance data and project descriptions.
  * On-line constructed wetlands workshop moderated by Greg Gearheart and Bob Gearheart.
  * Constructed Wetlands \- resources on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyâ site.
  * Google Books - Creating Freshwater Wetlands by Donald A. Hammer
  * [2] Constructed wetlands in Lake Macquarie, NSW, Australia.
  * [3] Federal Park Wetlands, Annandale, NSW, Australia.
  * [4] Whites Creek Wetland, Lilyfield NSW, Australia.
  * Wetpark water treatment systems

v â¢ d â¢ e

Stormwater structures  
Containment

Biofilter Â· Constructed wetland Â· Detention basin Â· Dry well Â· Media
filter Â· Retention basin Â· Stormwater detention vault  
Flow control

Flow control structure Â· Hydrodynamic separator Â· Storm drain  
Infiltration

Bioretention Â· Bioswale Â· Infiltration basin Â· Percolation trench Â·
Permeable paving  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructed_wetland"

Categories: Environmental engineering | Environmental soil science | Sewerage
infrastructure | Water pollution | Wetlands

Hidden categories: Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008 | All
articles with unsourced statements

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 23 December 2008, at 13:49.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



