
# Interactive voice response

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"IVR" redirects here. For other uses, see IVR (disambiguation).

Interactive voice response (IVR) is a dialog system technology that allows a
computer to detect voice and keypad inputs. IVR technology is used extensively
in telecommunications, but is also being introduced into automobile systems
for hands-free operation. Current deployment in automobiles revolves around
satellite navigation, audio and mobile phone systems. IVR systems can respond
with pre-recorded or dynamically generated audio to further direct users on
how to proceed. IVR systems can be used to control almost any function where
the interface can be broken down into a series of simple menu choices. In
telecommunications applications, such as customer support lines, IVR systems
generally scale well to handle large call volumes.

It has become common in industries that have recently entered the telecom
industry to refer to an Automated Attendant as an IVR. The terms Automated
Attendant and IVR are distinct and mean different things to traditional
telecom professionals, whereas emerging telephony and VoIP professionals often
use the term IVR as a catch-all to signify any kind of telephony menu, even a
basic automated attendant.

## Contents

  * 1 Typical uses
    * 1.1 Voice-activated dialers
    * 1.2 Entertainment and information
    * 1.3 Anonymous access
    * 1.4 Clinical trials
  * 2 Technologies used
    * 2.1 VoIP
  * 3 Criticism
    * 3.1 Outsourcing vs. contact center automation
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Typical uses

IVR systems are typically used to service high call volumes, reduce cost and
improve the customer experience. Examples of typical IVR applications are:
telephone banking, televoting, and credit card transactions. Large companies
use IVR services to extend the business hours of operation.

Call centers use IVR systems to identify and segment callers. The ability to
identify customers allows the ability to tailor services according to the
customer profile. It also allows the option of choosing automated services.
Information can be fed to the caller allowing choices such as: wait in the
queue, choose an automated service, or request a callback (at a suitable time
and telephone number). The use of computer telephony integration (CTI) will
allow the IVR system to look up the caller line identification (CLI) on a
network database and identify the caller. This is currently accurate for about
80% of inbound calls. In the cases where CLI is withheld or unavailable, the
caller can be asked to identify themselves by other methods such as a PIN or
password. The use of DNIS will ensure that the correct application and
language is executed by the IVR system.

### [edit] Voice-activated dialers

(VAD) Voice-activated IVR systems are now used to replace the switchboard or
PABX (Private Automatic Branch eXchange) operators which are used in many
hospitals and large businesses to reduce the caller waiting time. An
additional function is the ability to allow external callers to page hospital
staff and transfer the inbound call to the paged person.

### [edit] Entertainment and information

The largest installed IVR platforms are used for applications such as voting
in TV game shows such as Pop Idol and Big Brother which can generate enormous
call spikes.

The following are some of the more common uses of an IVR:

  * weather forecasts
  * crossword answers
  * telephone banking
  * order placement (particularly for mobile content, such as ringtones and logos)
  * caller identification and routing
  * balance inquiry
  * airline ticket booking
  * adult entertainment

### [edit] Anonymous access

IVR systems also allow callers to obtain data relatively anonymously.
Hospitals and Clinics have used IVR systems to allow callers to receive
anonymous access to test results. This is information that could easily be
handled by a person but the IVR system is used to preserve privacy and avoid
potential embarrassment of sensitive information or test results.

### [edit] Clinical trials

IVR systems are used by large pharmaceutical companies to conduct global
clinical trials and manage the large volumes of data generated. The caller
will respond to questions in their preferred language and their responses will
be logged into a database and possibly recorded at the same time to confirm
authenticity. Applications include patient randomization and drug supply
management.

## [edit] Technologies used

DTMF signals (entered from the telephone keypad) and natural language speech
recognition interpret the caller's response to voice prompts.

Other technologies include the ability to speak complex and dynamic
information such as an e-mail, news report or weather information using Text-
To-Speech (TTS). TTS is computer generated synthesized speech that is no
longer the robotic voice generally associated with computers. Real voices
create the speech in tiny fragments that are spliced together (concatenated)
before being played to the caller.

An IVR can be utilized in several different ways:

  1. Equipment installed on the customer premise
  2. Equipment installed in the PSTN (Public Switched Telephone Network)
  3. Application service provider (ASP).
  4. Virtual Hosted IVR

A simple voicemail system is different from an IVR in that it is person to
person whereas an IVR is person to computer. IVR voiceforms can be used to
provide a more complex voicemail experience to the caller. For example, the
IVR could ask if the caller wishes to hear, edit, forward or remove a message
that was just recorded.

An automatic call distributor (ACD) is often the first point of contact when
calling many larger businesses. An ACD uses digital storage devices to play
greetings or announcements, but typically routes a caller without prompting
for input. An IVR can play announcements and request an input from the caller.
This information can be used to route the call to a particular skillset. (A
skillset is a function applied to a group of call-center agents with a
particular skill.)

Interactive voice response can be used to front-end a call center operation by
identifying the needs of the caller. Information can be obtained from the
caller such as account numbers. Answers to simple questions such as account
balances or pre-recorded information can be provided without operator
intervention. Account numbers from the IVR are often compared to caller ID
data for security reasons and additional IVR responses are required if the
caller ID data does not match the account record.

IVR call flows are created in a variety of ways. A traditional IVR depended
upon proprietary programming or scripting languages, whereas modern IVR
applications are structured similar to WWW pages, using VoiceXML, SALT or
T-XML languages. The ability to use XML developed applications allows a Web
server to act as an application server, freeing the developer to focus on the
call flow. It was widely believed that developers would no longer require
specialized programming skills, however this has been proven to be misguided
as IVR applications need to understand the human reaction to the application
dialogue. This is the difference between a good user experience and IVR hell.

Higher level IVR development tools are available in recent years to further
simplify the application development process. A call flow diagram can be drawn
with a GUI tool and the application code (VoiceXML or SALT) can be
automatically generated. In addition, these tools normally provide extension
mechanisms for software integration, such as HTTP interface to web site and
Java interface for connecting to a database.

In telecommunications, an audio response unit (ARU) is a device that provides
synthesized voice responses to touch-tone keypresses (DTMF) by processing
calls based on (a) the call-originator input, (b) information received from a
database, and (c) information in the incoming call, such as the time of day.

ARUs increase the number of information calls handled and to provide
consistent quality in information retrieval.

#### [edit] VoIP

The increased usage of VoIP in voice networks is likely to affect how IVR will
be used in voice networks, this is due to the introduction of protocols such
as SIP. The introduction of SIP means that point to point communications is no
longer restricted to voice calls but can now be extended to multimedia
technologies such as video. This will bring a new meaning to automated
services as IVR extends its reach to video calls. Many IVR manufacturers are
currently working on IVVR (Interactive Voice and Video Response) systems,
especially for the mobile phone networks. The use of video will give IVR
systems the ability to use graphical and video information to assist the
caller.

The introduction of video IVR may allow systems in the future the ability to
read emotions and facial expressions. It may be used to identify the caller,
using technology such such as Iris scan or other biometric means. Recordings
of the caller may be stored to monitor certain transactions, and will be used
to reduce identity fraud.

## [edit] Criticism

IVR is often criticized as being unhelpful and difficult to use due to poor
design and lack of appreciation of the caller's needs.[1] Some callers object
to providing voice response to an automated system and prefer speaking with a
human respondent. A properly designed IVR application should provide the
caller's needs promptly and with a minimum of complexity.[neutrality disputed]

#### [edit] Outsourcing vs. contact center automation

Contact centers are very expensive to run, and can be seen as a drain on
companies' operations.[citation needed] Methods of reducing costs include
outsourcing and automation. Outsourcing to other countries can reduce
operational expenditure by as much as 30%, however, differences in culture and
language can prove problematic for customers, whose dissatisfaction can lead
to customer complaint and loss of business.

Automation in a contact center can also reduce operational expenditure by
around 30% though the introduction of technologies such as customer profiling,
CTI, and IVR using speech recognition. The use of automation in the contact
center promotes efficiency, allowing contact centers to be located in the
country from which the call is originated. However, automation can also prove
problematic when it fails, and can lead to long wait times for available
agents.

## [edit] See also

  * Automatic call distributor
  * Dual-tone multi-frequency (DTMF)
  * Voiceportal
  * Automated attendant
  * Call Whisper
  * Speech synthesis
  * Automatic number identification
  * DNIS
  * Speech recognition
  * Natural language
  * Dialog system

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "The Seven Deadly Sins of IVR". Call Centre Management Association. http://www.ccma.org.uk/ArticleDisplay.aspx?ID=61. Retrieved on 2007-12-12.

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2008)  
## [edit] External links

  * Speech Technology / Telephony at the Open Directory Project

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interactive_voice_response"

Categories: Telephone services | User interface techniques

Hidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Articles with minor POV
problems from September 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles needing
additional references from January 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 17:10.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



