
# Geodesic dome

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Spaceship Earth at Epcot, Walt Disney World, a familiar geodesic sphere

A geodesic dome is a spherical or partial-spherical shell structure or lattice
shell based on a network of great circles (geodesics) lying on the surface of
a sphere. The geodesics intersect to form triangular elements that have local
triangular rigidity and also distribute the stress across the entire
structure. When completed to form a full sphere, it is known as a geodesic
sphere.

Typically the design of a geodesic dome begins by selecting one of the
Platonic solids, such as an icosahedron inscribed in a sphere, tiling each
triangular face with smaller triangles, then projecting the vertices of each
tile to the sphere. The endpoints of the links of the completed sphere would
then be the projected endpoints on the sphere's surface. If this is done
exactly, each of the edges of the sub-triangles is slightly different lengths,
so it would require a very large number of links of different sizes. To
minimize the number of different sizes of links, various simplifications are
made. The result is a compromise consisting of a pattern of triangles with
their vertices lying approximately on the surface of the sphere. The edges of
the triangles form approximate geodesic paths over the surface of the dome
that distribute its weight.

Geodesic designs can be used to form any curved, enclosed space. Oddly-shaped
designs would require calculating for and custom building of each individual
strut, vertex or panel--resulting in potentially expensive construction.
Because of the expense and complexity of design and fabrication of any
geodesic dome, builders have tended to standardize on a few basic designs.

## Contents

  * 1 Related patterns
  * 2 History
  * 3 Chord factors
  * 4 Advantages of domes
  * 5 Disadvantages of dome homes
  * 6 Methods of construction
  * 7 Largest geodesic dome structures
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Related patterns

Similar non-geodetic structures may be based upon the pattern of edges and
vertices of certain platonic solids or upon various expansions of these called
Johnson solids. Such structures may be composted of struts of uniform length
while having faces other than triangles such as pentagons or squares, or these
faces may be subdivided by struts of other than the basic length. Plans and
licenses for such structures derived from licences of the Fuller patents were
produced during the 1970s by Zomeworks (now a manufacturer of solar trackers).

The building of strong stable structures out of patterns of reinforcing
triangles is most commonly seen in tent design. It has been applied in the
abstract in other industrial design, but even in management science and
deliberative structures as a conceptual metaphor, especially in the work of
Stafford Beer, whose syntegration method is based so specifically on dome
design that only fixed numbers of persons can take part in the process at each
deliberation stage.

## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Montreal BiosphÃ¨re, formerly the American Pavilion of Expo 67, by R.
Buckminster Fuller, on Ãle Sainte-HÃ©lÃ¨ne, Montreal, Canada

The first dome that could be called "geodesic" in every respect was designed
just after World War I by Walther Bauersfeld,[1] chief engineer of the Carl
Zeiss optical company, for a planetarium to house his new planetarium
projector. The dome was patented, constructed by the firm of Dykerhoff and
Wydmann on the roof of the Zeiss plant in Jena, Germany, and opened to the
public in 1922. Some 30 years later, R. Buckminster Fuller further
investigated this concept and named the dome "geodesic" from field experiments
with Kenneth Snelson and others at Black Mountain College in the late 1940s.
Although Fuller was not the original inventor, he developed and popularized
the idea, and received a U.S. patent.[2]

The geodesic dome appealed to Fuller because it was extremely strong for its
weight, its "omnitriangulated" surface provided an inherently stable
structure, and because a sphere encloses the greatest volume for the least
surface area. Fuller hoped that the geodesic dome would help address the
postwar housing crisis. This was in line with his prior hopes for both
versions of the Dymaxion House.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Climatron greenhouse at Missouri Botanical Gardens, built in 1960,
inspired the domes in the science fiction film Silent Running.

However, from a practical perspective, geodesic constructions have some
drawbacks. They have a very large number of edges in comparison with more
conventional structures which have just a few large flat surfaces. Each of the
edges must be prevented from leaking, which can be quite challenging for a
geodesic structure. Also, spaces enclosed within curved boundaries tend to be
less usable than spaces enclosed within flat boundaries. (Since it would be
impractical to produce sofas with every possible curved shape, they are
normally constructed along straight lines, and so leave wasted space when
placed in a curved space.)

The dome was successfully adopted for specialized industrial use, such as the
1958 Union Tank Car Company dome near Baton Rouge, Louisiana and specialty
buildings like the Kaiser Aluminum domes (constructed in numerous locations
across the US), auditoriums, weather observatories, and storage facilities.
The dome was soon breaking records for covered surface, enclosed volume, and
construction speed. According to a WAFB-TV of Baton Rouge news report on
November 27, 2007, the Union Tank Car Company Dome has been demolished.

Leveraging the geodesic dome's stability, the US Air Force experimented with
helicopter-deliverable units.

The dome was introduced to a wider audience as a pavilion at the 1964 World's
Fair in New York City. This dome is now used as an aviary by the Queens Zoo in
Flushing Meadows Corona Park.

Another dome from Expo 67 the Montreal, Canada World's Fair as part of the
American Pavilion. The structure's covering later burned, but the structure
itself still stands and, under the name BiosphÃ¨re, currently houses an
interpretive museum about the Saint Lawrence River.

In the 1970s, the Cinesphere dome was built at the Ontario Place amusement
park in Toronto, Canada. In 1975, a dome was constructed at the South Pole,
where its resistance to snow and wind loads is important.

Residential geodesic domes have been less successful than those used for
working and/or entertainment, largely because of their complexity and
consequent higher construction costs. Fuller himself lived in a geodesic dome
in Carbondale, Illinois, at the corner of Forest and Cherry. Unfortunately,
residential domes have so far not caught on to the extent that Fuller hoped.
He envisioned residential domes as air-deliverable products manufactured by an
aerospace-like industry. Fuller's dome home still exists, and a group called
RBF Dome NFP is attempting to restore the dome and have it registered as a
National Historic Landmark.

## [edit] Chord factors

Image:GÃ©ode V 3 1.gif Image:GÃ©ode V 3 1 duale.gif  
A geodesic sphere and its dual.  
The mathematical object "chord" of the "geodesic sphere" corresponds to the
structural "strut" of the physical "geodesic dome". The general definition of
a chord is a (straight) line segment joining two points on a curve. For simple
geodesic domes we recognize the associated curve to be the surface of a
sphere. Here is how chords of geodesic spheres are generated. We first choose
an underlying polyhedron with equal triangle faces. The regular icosahedron is
most popular. The sphere we use is specifically the "circumscribing sphere"
that contains the points (vertices) of the underlying polyhedron. The desired
frequency of the subsequent geodesic sphere or dome is the number of parts or
segments into which a side (edge) of the underlying polyhedral triangle is
subdivided. The frequency has historically been denoted by the Greek letter
"Î½" (nu). By connecting like points along the subdivided sides we produce a
natural triangular grid of segments inside each underlying triangle face. Each
segment of the grid is then projected as a "chord" onto the surface of the
circumscribing sphere. The technical definition of a chord factor is the ratio
of the chord length to the radius of the circumscribing sphere. It is
therefore convenient to think of the circumscribing sphere as scaled to radius
= 1 in which "chord factors" are the same as "chord lengths" (decimal numbers
less than one).

For geodesic spheres a well-known formula for calculating any "chord factor"
is

chord factor = 2 Sin (Î¸ / 2) where Î¸ is the corresponding angle of arc for
the given chord, that is, the "central angle" spanned by the chord with
respect to the center of the circumscribing sphere. Determining the central
angle usually requires some non-trivial spherical geometry.

In Geodesic Math and How to Use It Hugh Kenner writes, "Tables of chord
factors, containing as they do the essential design information for spherical
systems, were for many years guarded like military secrets. As late as 1966,
some 3Î½ icosa figures from Popular Science Monthly were all anyone outside
the circle of Fuller licensees had to go on." (page 57, 1976 edition). Other
tables became available with publication of Lloyd Kahn's Domebook 1 (1970) and
Domebook 2 (1971). With advent of personal computers, the mathematics became
more accessible. Rick Bono's Dome software, outputs a script that can be used
with the POV-ray raytrace to produce 3D pictures of domes. Domes based on the
frameworks of different underlying polyhedra along with various methods for
subdividing them will produce quite different results. Mathematical formulas
developed by Peter W. Messer for calculating chord factors and dihedral angles
for the general geodesic sphere appear in the Appendix of the 1999 Dover
edition of Spherical Models by Magnus J. Wenninger.  

## [edit] Advantages of domes

Like all domes, geodesic domes provide an enclosed space free of structural
supports. The basic structure can be erected very quickly from lightweight
pieces by a small crew. Domes as large as 50 meters have been constructed in
the wilderness from rough materials without a crane. The dome is also
aerodynamic, so it withstands considerable wind loads, such as those created
by hurricanes. Solar heating is possible by placing an arc of windows across
the dome: the more heating needed, the wider the arc should be, to encompass
more of the year.

Today, there are many companies that sell both dome plans and frame material
with instructions designed simply enough for owners to build themselves, and
many do to make the net cost lower than standard construction homes.
Construction techniques have improved based on real-world experience over 60
years, and many newer dome homes can resolve nearly all of the disadvantages
below that were more true of the early dome homes.

## [edit] Disadvantages of dome homes

As a housing system, the dome can have numerous drawbacks and problems:

The shape of a dome house makes it difficult to conform to code requirements
for placement of sewer vents and chimneys. Off-the-shelf building materials
(e.g., plywood, strand board) normally come in rectangular shapes and so much
material may have to be scrapped after cutting rectangles down to triangles,
thus increasing the cost of construction. Fire escapes are problematic; codes
require them for larger structures, and they are expensive. Windows conforming
to code can cost anywhere from 5 to 15 times as much as windows in
conventional houses. Professional electrical wiring costs more because of
increased labor time. Even owner-wired situations are costly, because more of
certain materials are required for dome construction.

Air stratification and moisture distribution within a dome are unusual, and
these conditions tend to quickly degrade wooden framing or interior paneling.
Privacy is difficult to guarantee because a dome is difficult to partition
satisfactorily. Sounds, smells, and even reflected light tend to be conveyed
through the entire structure.

As with any curved shape, the dome produces wall areas that can be difficult
to use and leaves some peripheral floor area with restricted use due to lack
of headroom. This can leave a volume that may require heating â representing
a cost in energy â but that cannot be lived in. Circular plan shapes lack
the simple modularity provided by rectangles. Furnishers and fitters usually
design with flat surfaces in mind, and so placing a standard sofa (for
example) results in a half-moon behind the sofa being wasted. This is best
overcome by purpose-built fittings, though it adds to cost.

Dome builders using cut-board sheathing materials find it hard to seal domes
against rain, because of their many seams. Also, these seams may be stressed
because ordinary solar heat flexes the entire structure each day as the sun
moves across the sky.

The most effective waterproofing method with a wooden dome is to shingle the
dome, but even this can be a problem at the top of the dome where the slope is
less than that required by most roofing materials. (One solution is to add a
peaked cap to the top of the dome or to modify the dome shape.) One-piece
reinforced concrete or plastic domes are also in use, and some domes have been
constructed from plastic or waxed cardboard triangles that are overlapped in
such a way as to shed water. Buckminster Fuller's former student J. Baldwin
states that there is no reason for a properly designed, well-constructed dome
to leak, and that some designs cannot leak (Bucky Works: Buckminster Fuller's
Ideas for Today). However, Lloyd Kahn, after writing two books on the subject
(Domebook 1 and Domebook 2), became disillusioned with domes. He calls domes
"smart but not wise",[3] and has collected many of the criticisms given above.

## [edit] Methods of construction

<IMG>

<IMG>

Construction details of a permanently installed tent-type geodesic dome by
Buckminster Fuller.

Wooden domes have a hole drilled in the width of a strut. A stainless steel
band locks the strut's hole to a steel pipe. With this method, the struts may
be cut to the exact length needed. Triangles of exterior plywood are then
nailed to the struts. The dome is wrapped from the bottom to the top with
several stapled layers of tar paper, in order to shed water, and finished with
shingles. This type of dome is often called a hub-and-strut dome because of
the use of steel hubs to tie the struts together.

Panelized domes are constructed of separately-framed timbers covered in
plywood. The three members comprising the triangular frame are often cut at
compound angles in order to provide for a flat fitting of the various
triangles. Holes are drilled through the members at precise locations and
steel bolts then connect the triangles to form the dome. These members are
often 2x4's or 2x6's, which allow for more insulation to fit within the
triangle. The panelized technique allows the builder to attach the plywood
skin to the triangles while safely working on the ground or in a comfortable
shop out of the weather. This method does not require expensive steel hubs.

Temporary greenhouse domes have been constructed by stapling plastic sheeting
onto a dome constructed from one-inch square beams. The result is warm,
movable by hand in sizes less than 20 feet, and cheap. It should be staked to
the ground to prevent it being moved by wind.

Steel-framework domes can be easily constructed of electrical conduit. One
flattens the end of a strut and drills bolt holes at the needed length. A
single bolt secures a vertex of struts. The nuts are usually set with
removable locking compound, or if the dome is portable, have a castle nut with
a cotter pin. This is the standard way to construct domes for jungle-gyms.

Concrete and foam plastic domes generally start with a steel framework dome,
wrapped with chicken wire and wire screen for reinforcement. The chicken wire
and screen is tied to the framework with wire ties. A coat of material is then
sprayed or molded onto the frame. Tests should be performed with small squares
to achieve the correct consistency of concrete or plastic. Generally, several
coats are necessary on the inside and outside. The last step is to saturate
concrete or polyester domes with a thin layer of epoxy compound to shed water.

Some concrete domes have been constructed from prefabricated, prestressed,
steel-reinforced concrete panels that can be bolted into place. The bolts are
within raised receptacles covered with little concrete caps to shed water. The
triangles overlap to shed water. The triangles in this method can be molded in
forms patterned in sand with wooden patterns, but the concrete triangles are
usually so heavy that they must be placed with a crane. This construction is
well-suited to domes because there is no place for water to pool on the
concrete and leak through. The metal fasteners, joints and internal steel
frames remain dry, preventing frost and corrosion damage. The concrete resists
sun and weathering. Some form of internal flashing or caulking must be placed
over the joints to prevent drafts. The 1963 Cinerama Dome was built from
precast concrete hexagons and pentagons.

## [edit] Largest geodesic dome structures

Many geodesic domes built are still in use. According to the Buckminster
Fuller Institute,[4] the world's ten largest geodesic domes are:

  * Fantasy Entertainment Complex: Kyosho Isle, Japan, 710 ft (216 m) [1]
  * Multi-Purpose Arena: Nagoya, Japan, 614 ft (187 m) [2]
  * Tacoma Dome: Tacoma, Washington, USA, 530 ft (161.5 m)
  * Superior Dome: Northern Michigan University. Marquette, Michigan, USA, 525 ft (160 m)[3]

  * Walkup Skydome: Northern Arizona University. Flagstaff, Arizona, USA, 502 ft (153 m) [4]
  * Round Valley High School Stadium: Springerville-Eagar, AZ, USA, 440 ft (134 m)
  * Former Spruce Goose Hangar: Long Beach, California, USA, 415 ft (126 m)
  * Formosa Plastics Storage Facility: Mai Liao, Taiwan, 402 ft (122 m)
  * Union Tank Car Maintenance Facility: Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA, 384 ft (117) m (Demolished in November 2007.) [5]
  * Union Lehigh Portland Cement Storage Facility: Union Bridge, Maryland, USA, 374 ft (114 m)

## [edit] See also

  * Dome
  * Concrete dome
  * Cloud nine (Tensegrity sphere)
  * Domed city
  * Fullerenes, molecules which resemble the geodesic dome structure
  * Hoberman sphere
  * Monolithic dome
  * Radome
  * Silent Running 1972 science fiction film prominently featuring geodesic domes.
  * Space frames
  * Stepan Center
  * Shell structure
  * Gridshell
  * Truss
  * Geodesic tents

## [edit] References

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2007)  
  1. ^ First Geodesic Dome: Planetarium in Jena 1922 incl. patent information
  2. ^ For a more detailed historical account, see the chapter "Geodesics, Domes, and Spacetime" in Tony Rothman's book "Science a la Mode", Princeton University Press, 1989.
  3. ^ "Refried Domes" by Lloyd Kahn
  4. ^ "World's 10 Largest Domes". Buckminster Fuller Institute. http://bfi.org/our_programs/who_is_buckminster_fuller/design_science/geodesic_domes/worlds_10_largest_domes.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Look up geodesic dome in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * The R. Buckminster Fuller FAQ: Geodesic Domes
  * Emergency Shelters International, LLC.
  * Build Your Own Geodesic Dome
  * Geodesic Dome Notes: 57 dome variants featured (1V to 10V) of various solids (icosa, cube, octa, etc)
  * Article about the Eden Domes (PDF file 5.1 MB)
  * Construction of the Eden Project Biomes
  * Geodaetische Kuppeln (Geodesic Dome) by T.E. Dorozinski
  * Geometry Dome: geodesic dome design without corner connectors, featured in the Guggenheim Museum and at BurningMan
  * Shape optimization of Shell and Spatial structure
  * Creating Paper and Plastic Domes shows two original dome model designs
  * 3D Warehouse - Geodesic Collection Catalog(s) of free 3D digital models for Google SketchUp and Google Earth

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geodesic_dome"

Categories: Buckminster Fuller | House types | Geodesic domes | Domes

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 00:15.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



