
# Internet forum

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

An Internet forum, or message board, is an online discussion site.[1] It is
the modern equivalent of a traditional bulletin board, and a technological
evolution of the dialup bulletin board system.[2][3] From a technological
standpoint, forums[note 1] or boards are web applications managing user-
generated content.[4][5]

<IMG>

<IMG>

An Internet forum software package

<IMG>

<IMG>

Another Internet forum software package

People participating in an Internet forum can build bonds with each other and
interest groups will easily form around a topic's discussion, subjects dealt
with in or around sections in the forum.

## Contents

  * 1 Registration or anonymity
  * 2 Rules and policies on forums
    * 2.1 Troll
    * 2.2 Sock Puppet
    * 2.3 Spamming
    * 2.4 Double posting
    * 2.5 Word censor
  * 3 Forum structure
    * 3.1 User groups
      * 3.1.1 Posters
      * 3.1.2 Moderator
      * 3.1.3 Administrator
    * 3.2 Post
    * 3.3 Thread
  * 4 Discussion
    * 4.1 Flame wars
  * 5 Common features
    * 5.1 Tripcodes and capcodes
    * 5.2 Private message
    * 5.3 Attachment
    * 5.4 BBCode and HTML
    * 5.5 Emoticon
    * 5.6 Poll
    * 5.7 RSS and ATOM
    * 5.8 Other forum features
  * 6 Comparison with other web applications
  * 7 History
  * 8 See also
  * 9 Notes
  * 10 Examples
  * 11 References

  
## [edit] Registration or anonymity

In the United States and some parts of Europe, most Internet forums require
registration to post. Registered users of the site are referred to as members
and are allowed to submit or send electronic messages through the web
application. The process of registration involves verification of one's age
(typically over 12 is required so as to meet COPPA requirements of American
forum software) followed by a declaration of the terms of service (other
documents may also be present) and a request for agreement to said
terms.[6][7][8] Subsequently, if all goes well, the candidate is presented
with a web form to fill requesting at the very least: a username (an alias),
password, email and validation of a CAPTCHA code.

While simply completing the registration web form is â usually â enough to
generate an account[note 2] the status label Inactive is commonly given by
default until the registered confirms the email address indeed belongs to him.
Until that time, the registered can log in to his new account but may not use
the forum for communication (posts, threads, private messages).

Sometimes a referrer system is implemented. A referrer is someone who lead one
or otherwise "helped someone" with the decision to join the site (similarly
how a HTTP referer is the site who linked one to another site). Usually for
forums referrers are other members. The referrer system is also sometimes
implemented so that if a visitor visits the forum though a link such as
`referrerid=300`, the user with the id number (in the example 300) would
receive referral credit if the visitor registers.[9] The purpose is commonly
just to give credit (sometimes rewards are implied) to those who help the
community grow.

On Asian Internet forums, especially in China and Japan, registration is
frequently optional and anonymity is sometimes even encouraged.[10] On these
forums, a tripcode system may be used to allow verification of an identity
without the need for formal registration.

## [edit] Rules and policies on forums

Forums are governed by a set of individuals, commonly referred to as
administrators and Moderators, which are responsible for the forums'
conception, technical maintenance and policies. Most forums have a list of
rules detailing the wishes, aim and guidelines of the forums creators. There
is usually also a FAQ section contain basic information for new members and
people not yet familiar with the use and principles of a forum.

Rules on forum usually apply to the entire user body and often have preset
exceptions, most commonly designating a section as an exception. For example,
in an IT forum any discussion regarding anything but computer programming
languages may be outlawed, with the exception of a general chat section.

Forum rules are maintained and enforced by the moderation team, but users are
allowed to help out via what's known as a report system. Most American forum
software contains such a system.[11][12] It consists of a small function
applicable to each post (including one's own). Using it will notify all
currently available moderators of its location, and subsequent action or
judgment can be carried out immediately, which is desirable in large or very
developed boards. Generally, moderators encourage members to also use the
private message system if they wish to report behavior. Moderators will
generally frown upon attempts of moderation by non-moderators, especially when
the would-be moderators do not even issue a report. Messages from non-
moderators acting as moderators generally declare a post as against the rules,
or predict punishment. While not harmful, statements which attempt to enforce
the rules are discouraged.[13]

When rules are broken several steps are commonly taken. First a warning is
usually given; this is commonly in the form of a private message but recent
development has made it possible for it to be integrated into the software.
Subsequently, if the act is ignored and warnings do not work, the member is
â usually â first exiled from the forum for a number of days. Denying
someone access to the site is called a ban (as in "you have been banished").
Bans can mean the person can no longer log in or even view the site anymore.
If the offender, after the warning sentence, repeats the offense, another ban
is given, usually this time a longer one. Continuous harassment of the site
eventually leads to a permanent ban. However, in most cases this simply means
the account is locked. In extreme cases where the offender â after being
permanently banned â creates another account and continues to harass the
site, administrators will apply an IP ban (this can also be applied at the
server level): if the IP is static, the machine of the offender is prevented
from accessing the site. In some extreme circumstances, IP range bans or
country bans can be applied; however, this is usually for political, licensing
or other reasons. See also: Block (internet), IP blocking, Internet
censorship.

Offending content is usually deleted. Sometimes if the topic is considered the
source of the problem, it is locked; often a poster may request a topic
expected to draw problems to be locked as well, although the moderators decide
whether to grant it. In a locked thread, members cannot post anymore. In cases
where the topic is considered a breach of rules it â with all of its posts
â may be deleted.

### [edit] Troll

Main article: Troll (Internet)

A troll is a user that repeatedly and intentionally breaches netiquette, often
posting derogatory or otherwise inflammatory messages about sensitive topics
in an established online community to bait users into responding, often
starting flame wars. They may also link to shock sites or plant images on
networks that others may find disturbing in order to cause confrontation.
Trolls known as gravediggers (or necromancers) purposefully post in old and
irrelevant threads simply to bring that thread to light again.

### [edit] Sock Puppet

Main article: Sockpuppet (Internet)

The term sock puppet refers to someone who is simultaneously registered under
different pseudonyms on a particular message board or forum. The analogy of a
sock puppet is of a puppeteer holding up both hands and supplying dialogue to
both puppets simultaneously. A sock puppet will create multiple accounts over
a period of time, using each user to debate or agree with each other on a
forum. Sock puppets are usually found when an IP check is done on the accounts
in a forum.

### [edit] Spamming

Main article: Forum spam

Forum spamming is a breach of netiquette where users repeat the same word or
phrase over and over, but differs from multiple posting in that spamming is
usually a willful act which sometimes has malicious intent. This is a common
trolling technique. It can also be traditional spam, unpaid advertisements
that are in breach of the forum's rules. Spammers utilize a number of illicit
techniques to post their spam, including the use of botnets.

Some forums consider posts consisting solely of: Thank you., I love it. â or
similar phrases â spam.

### [edit] Double posting

One common faux pas on Internet forums is to post the same message twice.
Users sometimes post versions of a message that are only slightly different,
especially in forums where they are not allowed to edit their earlier posts.
Multiple posting instead of editing prior posts can artificially inflate a
user's post count. Multiple posting can be unintentional; a user's browser
might display an error message even though the post has been transmitted or a
user of a slow forum might become impatient and repeatedly hit the submit
button. Multiple posting can also be used as a method of trolling or spreading
forum spam. A user may also send the same post to several forums, which is
termed crossposting. This problem was inherited from Usenet and is a common
complaint in many forums.

### [edit] Word censor

    See also Internet censorship#"By-catch".
A word censoring system is commonly included in the forum software package.
The system will pick up words in the body of the post or some other user
editable forum element (like user titles) and if they partially match a
certain keyword (commonly no case sensitivity) they will be censored. The most
common censoring is letter replacement with an asterisk character; for
example: in the user title it is deemed inappropriate for users to use words
such as "admin", "moderator", "leader" and so on, if the censoring system is
implemented a title such as "forum leader" may be filtered to "forum ******".
Rude or vulgar words are common targets for the censoring system.[14][15]

## [edit] Forum structure

A forum consists of a tree like directory structure containing at the lowest
end topics (commonly called threads) and inside them posts. Logically forums
are organised into a finite set of generic topics (usually with one main
topic) driven and updated by a group known as members, and governed by a group
known as moderators.

### [edit] User groups

Internally, Western-style forums organise visitors and logged in members into
user groups. Privileges and rights are given based on these groups. A person
viewing a closed thread as a member will see a box saying he does not have the
right to submit messages there, but a moderator will likely see the same box
granting him access to more than just posting messages.[16]

An unregistered user of the site is commonly known as a guest or visitor.
Guests are granted access to all functions that do not require database
alterations or breach privacy. A guest can view the contents of the forum or
use such features as read marking.[note 3] A person who is a very frequent
visitor of the forum, a section or even a thread is referred to as a lurker
and the habit is referred to as lurking. Registered members often will refer
to themselves as lurking in a particular location, which is to say they have
no intention of participating in that section but enjoy reading the
contributions to it.

#### [edit] Posters

The posters to the forum are considered the driving force behind the
community. On some forums, a poster may edit or delete his or her own posts,
although sometimes these rights are reserved.

Western-style forums often allow an avatar and signature. The avatar is
generally a small image often limited to 80x80 pixels (other common dimensions
include 100x100 and 90x90 pixels) and limited to a certain filesize (6
kilobytes and 50 kilobytes are common) displayed below a user's username. The
forum signature (or sig) consists of text and/or images defined by the user
and appended at the end of each of his posts. Both fundamentally are just
expressions of the user's creativity, although many forums extend their rules
to signatures.

Specialized forums like to split the members into specific groups; a military-
themed group, for example, may use military-style ranks, with basic members as
'privates' while administrators would be styled as 'generals', and moderators
may bear the title 'MP'. These titles are usually displayed below the username
or avatar, and also indicate which members have which access.

Moderator Control Panel.

Moderator Control Panel.

Administration Control Panel.

Administration Control Panel.

#### [edit] Moderator

The moderators (short singular form: "mod") are users (or employees) of the
forum which are granted access to the posts and threads of all members for the
purpose of moderating discussion (similar to arbitration) and also keeping the
forum clean (neutralising spam and spambots etc). Because they have access to
all posts and threads in their area of responsibility, it is common for a
knowledgeable and trustworthy member to be promoted to moderator for such a
task. Moderators also answer users' concerns about the forum, general
questions, as well as responding to specific complaints.[17] Moderators
themselves may have ranks: some may be given mod privilege over only a
particular topic or section, while others (called 'global' or 'super') may be
allowed access anywhere. Common privileges of moderators include: deleting,
merging, moving, and splitting of posts and threads; closing, renaming,
stickying of threads; banning, unbanning, warning the members; or adding,
editing, removing the polls of threads.[18]

#### [edit] Administrator

The administrators (short form: "admin") manage the technical details required
for running the site. As such, they may promote (and demote) members to
moderators, manage the rules, create sections and sub-sections, as well as
perform any database operations (database backup etc). Administrators often
also act as moderators. Administrators may also make forum-wide announcements,
or change the appearance (known as the skin) of a forum.[18]

The term prune used extensively in administration panels is synonymous with
delete or remove. The term comes from pruning, the practice of removing
diseased, non-productive, or otherwise unwanted portions from a plant.

### [edit] Post

A post is a user submitted message enclosed into a block containing the user's
details and the date and time it was submitted. Members are usually allowed to
edit or delete their own posts. Posts are contained in threads, where they
appear as boxes one after another. The first post starts the thread; this may
be called the original post, or OP. Posts that follow in the thread are meant
to continue discussion about that post, or respond to other replies; it is not
unknown for discussions to be derailed.

On Western forums, the classic way to show a member's own details (such as
name and avatar) has been on the left side of the post, in a narrow column of
fixed width, with the post controls located on the right, at the bottom of the
main body, above the signature block. In more recent forum software
implementations the Asian style of displaying the members' details above the
post has been copied.

Posts have an internal limit usually measured in characters. Often one is
required to have a message of minimum length of 10 characters. There is always
an upper limit but it is rarely reached â most boards have it at either
10.000, 30.000 or 50.000 characters.

### [edit] Thread

A thread is a collection of posts, usually displayed â by default â from
oldest to latest, although the option for a threaded view (a tree-like view
applying logical reply structure before chronological order) can be available.
A thread is defined by a title, an additional description that may summarise
the intended discussion, and an opening or original post (common abbreviation
'OP', which can also mean original poster) which opens whatever dialogue or
makes whatever announcement the poster wished. A thread can contain any number
of posts, including multiple posts from the same members, even if they are one
after the other.

A thread is contained in a forum, and is displayed in chronological order from
newest to oldest, where the date is taken as the date of the last post
(options to order threads by other criteria are generally available). When a
member posts in a thread it will jump to the top since it is the latest
updated thread. Similarly, other threads will jump in front of it when they
receive posts. When a member posts in a thread for no reason but to have it go
to the top, it is referred to as a bump or bumping. Threads which are
important but rarely receive posts are stickyed (or, in some software,
'pinned'). A sticky thread will always appear in front of normal threads,
often in its own section.

A thread's popularity is measured on forums in reply (total posts minus one
â the opening post) counts. Some forums also track page views. Threads
meeting a set number of posts or a set number of views may receive a
designation such as "hot thread" and be displayed with a different icon
compared to others threads.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Thread (viewing as moderator)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Forum (viewing as moderator)  
  

## [edit] Discussion

Forums prefer a premise of open and free discussion and often adopt de facto
standards. Most common topics on forums include questions, comparisons, polls
of opinion as well as debates. Because of their volatile and random behavior
it is not uncommon for nonsense or unsocial behavior to sprout as people lose
temper, especially if the topic is controversial. Poor understanding of
argumentation theory and differences in values of the participants is a common
problem on forums. Because replies to a topic are often wording aimed at
someone's point of view, discussion will usually go slightly off into several
directions as people question each others validity, sources and so on.
Circular discussion and ambiguity in replies can carry out arguments for
several tens of posts of a thread eventually ending when everyone gives up or
another similar debate takes it over. It is not uncommon for a style over
substance or ad hominem debates to be the ones to take it over. Other problems
on forums include catch-22 logic, regress arguments, vagueness, counterfactual
history arguments and so on.

### [edit] Flame wars

Main article: Flaming (Internet)

When a thread â or in some cases an entire forum â becomes unstable the
result is usually uncontrolled spam in the form of one-line complaints, image
macros or abuse of the report system. When the discussion becomes heated and
sides do nothing more than complain and not accept each other's differences in
point of view, the discussion degenerates into what is called a flame war. To
flame someone means to go off-topic and attack the person rather than their
opinion. Likely candidates for flame wars are usually religion and socio-
political topics. Threads which degenerate to a level below the forum
moderators are usually locked but when the problem is considered contagious
they are deleted.

When a topic that has degenerated into a flame war is considered akin to that
of the forum (be it a section or the entire board) spam and flames have a
chance of spreading outside the topic and causing trouble, usually in the form
of vandalism. Some forums (commonly game forums) have suffered from forum wide
flame wars almost immediately after their conception, because of a pre-
existing flame war element in the online community.

## [edit] Common features

By default to be an Internet forum, the web application needs an ability to
submit threads and replies. Forum software may sometimes allow categories or
subforums. The chronological older-to-newer view is generally associated with
forums (the newer to older being associated more akin to blogs).

### [edit] Tripcodes and capcodes

Main article: Tripcode

In a tripcode system, a secret password is added to the user's name following
a separator character (often an octothorpe). This password, or tripcode, is
hashed into a special key, or trip, distinguishable from the name by HTML
styles. Tripcodes cannot be faked but on some types of forum software they are
insecure and can be guessed.

Moderators and administrators will frequently assign themselves capcodes, or
tripcodes where the guessable trip is replaced with a special notice (such as
"# Administrator"), or cap.

### [edit] Private message

Main article: Personal message

A private message is a message sent in private from a member to one or more
other members. The ability to send so-called carbon copies is sometimes
available. When sending a carbon copy (cc), the users to whom the message is
sent directly will not be aware of the recipients of the carbon copy or even
if one was sent in the first place.[example 1]

Private messages are generally used for personal conversations. They can also
be used with tripcodes-- a message is addressed to a public trip and can be
picked up by typing in the tripcode.

### [edit] Attachment

An attachment can be almost any file. When someone attaches a file to a post
they are uploading the file to the forums' server. Forums usually have very
strict limit on what can be attached and what cannot (among which the size of
the files in question).

### [edit] BBCode and HTML

Main article: BBCode

HyperText Markup Language (HTML) is sometimes allowed but usually its use is
discouraged or when allowed it is extensively filtered. When HTML is disabled
Bulletin Board Code (BBCode) is the most common preferred alternative. BBCode
usually consists of a tag, similar to HTML only instead of `<` and `>` the
tagname is enclosed within square brackets (meaning: `[` and `]`). Commonly
`[i]` is used for italics, `[b]` is used for bold, `[u]` for underline,
`[color="value"]` for color and `[list]` for lists, as well as `[img]` for
images and `[url]` for links.

The following example BBCode: `[b]This[/b] is [i]clever[/i] [b] [i]text[/i]
[/b]` when the post is viewed the code is rendered to HTML and will appear as:
This is clever text.

### [edit] Emoticon

Main article: Emoticon

Emoticon or smiley is a symbol or combination of symbols used to convey
emotional content in written or message form. Forums implement a system
through which some of the text representations of an emoticons (e.g. `XD`,
`:p`) are rendered as a small image. Depending on part the world the forum's
topic originates (since most forums are international) smilies can be replaced
by other forms of similar graphics, an example would be kaoani (e.g.
`*(^O^)*`, `(^-^)b`).

### [edit] Poll

Most forums implement an opinion poll system for threads. Most implementations
allow for single-choice or multi-choice (sometimes limited to a certain
number) when selecting options as well as private or public display of voters.
Polls can be set to expire after a certain date or in some cases after a
number of days from its creation. Members vote in a poll and a statistic is
displayed graphically.

### [edit] RSS and ATOM

Main article: Web feed

RSS and ATOM feeds allow a minimalistic means of subscribing to the forum.
Common implementations only allow RSS feeds listing the last few threads
updated for the forum index and the last posts in a thread.

### [edit] Other forum features

An ignore list allows members to hide posts of other members that they do not
want to see or have a problem with. In most implementations they are referred
to as foe list or ignore list. Usually the posts are not hidden, but minimized
with only a small bar indication a post from the user on the ignore list is
there.[19][12] Internet forums include a member list, present in almost all
forums it allows display of all forum members, with integrated search feature.
Some forums will not list members with 0 posts, even if they have activated
their accounts.

Common on forums, a subscription is a form of automated notification
integrated into the software of most forums. It usually notifies either by
email or on the site when the member returns. The option to subscribe is
available for every thread while logged in. Subscriptions works with read
marking, namely the property of unread which is given to the content never
served to the user by the software.

Recent development in some popular implementations of forum software has
brought social network features and functionality. Such features include
personal galleries, pages as well as a social network like chat systems.

## [edit] Comparison with other web applications

One significant difference between forums and electronic mailing lists is that
mailing lists automatically deliver new messages to the subscriber, while
forums require the member to visit the website and check for new posts.
Because members may miss replies in threads they are interested in, many
modern forums offer an "e-mail notification" feature, whereby members can
choose to be notified of new posts in a thread, and web feeds that allow
members to see a summary of the new posts using aggregator software. The main
difference between newsgroups and forums is that additional software, a
newsreader, is required to participate in newsgroups. Visiting and
participating in forums normally requires no additional software beyond the
web browser.

Wikis, unlike conventional forums, typically allow all users to edit all
content, including each other's messages. This level of content manipulation
is reserved for moderators or administrators on most forums. Wikis also allow
the creation of other content outside of the talk pages. On the other hand,
weblogs and generic content management systems tend to be locked down to the
point where only a few select users can post blog entries, although many allow
other users to comment upon them.

Forums differ from chat rooms and instant messaging in that forum participants
do not have to be online simultaneously to receive or send messages. Messages
posted to a forum or Usenet are publicly available for some time, which is
uncommon in chat rooms that maintain frequent activity.

One rarity among forums is the ability to create your own picture album. Forum
participants can upload personal pictures onto the site, add descriptions to
the pictures, and choose album covers. Pictures are in the same format as
posting threads, and contain the same options such as "Report Post" and "Reply
to Post".

## [edit] History

Early Internet forums could be described as a web version of a newsgroup or
electronic mailing list; allowing people to post messages and comment on other
messages. Later developments emulated the different newsgroups or individual
lists, providing more than one forum, dedicated to a particular topic.[2]

Internet forums are prevalent in several developed countries. In terms of
countable posts, Japan is far in the lead with over two million posts per day
on their largest forum, 2channel. China also has many millions of posts on
forums such as Tianya Club. The United States does not have any one large
forum, but instead several hundred thousand smaller forums, the largest of
which are Gaia Online, IGN and GameFAQs. China, the Netherlands, and France
are also home to hundreds of independent forums.[citation needed] Some
countries such as Finland and Sweden do not have many prevalent forums despite
having open and easily available Internet access.[citation needed]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Internet Forums are used frequently in conjunction with multiplayer online
game sites.

Forums perform a function similar to that of dial-up bulletin board systems
and Usenet networks that were common from the late 1970s to the 1990s.[2]
Early web-based forums date back as far as 1996. A sense of virtual community
often develops around forums that have regular users. Technology, computer
games and/or video games, sports, music, fashion, religion, and politics are
popular areas for forum themes, but there are forums for a huge number of
topics. Internet slang and image macros popular across the Internet are
abundant and widely used in Internet forums.

Forum software packages are widely available on the Internet and are written
in a variety of programming languages, such as PHP, Perl, Java and ASP. The
configuration and records of posts can be stored in text files or in a
database. Each package offers different features, from the most basic,
providing text-only postings, to more advanced packages, offering multimedia
support and formatting code (usually known as BBCode). Many packages can be
integrated easily into an existing website to allow visitors to post comments
on articles.

Several other web applications, such as weblog software, also incorporate
forum features. Wordpress comments at the bottom of a blog post allow for a
single-threaded discussion of any given blog post. Slashcode, on the other
hand, is far more complicated, allowing fully threaded discussions and
incorporating a robust moderation and meta-moderation system as well as many
of the profile features available to forum users.

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Internet portal  
Technologies:

  * Bulletin board system

  * Imageboard

  * Shoutbox
  * Usenet

Concepts:

  * Chat room
  * Hit-and-run posting
  * Internet social network
  * Online research communities
  * Social software
  * Social web
  * Virtual community

Implementations:

  * Comparison of Internet forum software
  * Comparison of Internet forum software (ASP)
  * Comparison of internet forum software (other)
  * Comparison of Internet forum software (PHP)

  

Culture:

  * Internet meme
  * Internet slang
  * List of Internet phenomena
  * List of internet slang

  

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ the term forums refers to the site, while the term forum refers to one of many containers (directories) that the site uses to organize the user submitted content
  2. ^ an account is a space on the site identified by the chosen username through which a member carries out activities and contributes.
  3. ^ read marking is the process through which a thread, post or forum which has been viewed is distinguished from those which have not. The function is usually automatic with the addition of controls, like Mark All etc.

## [edit] Examples

  1. ^ Presuming someone is sending a private message and has the ability to send carbon copies: If someone fills the recipient field with "John" and "Tom", and the carbon copy field with "Gordon". John will know Tom got the message. Tom knows John got the message. But, both Tom and John have no clue that Gordon got the message as well.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "vBulletin Community Forum - FAQ: What is a bulletin board?". vBulletin.com. http://www.vbulletin.com/forum/faq.php?faq=vb3_board_usage#faq_vb3_forums_threads_posts. Retrieved on 2008-09-13. "A bulletin board is an online discussion site. It's sometimes also called a 'board' or 'forums'. It may contain several categories, consisting of forums, threads and individual posts."
  2. ^ a b c "What is an "Internet forum"? (video entry by Ethan Feerst and Dylan Stewart group)". http://www.videojug.com/expertanswer/internet-communities-and-forums-2/what-is-an-internet-forum. Retrieved on 2008-11-04.
  3. ^ "Glossary Of Technical Terms". Green Web Design. http://www.greenwebdesign.com/Glossary-Of-Technical-Terms.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-28.
  4. ^ "Brevard User's Group - Technical Glossary". Brevard User's Group. http://bugclub.org/glossary.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-28.
  5. ^ "Glossary Of Technical Terms". Green Web Design. http://www.greenwebdesign.com/Glossary-Of-Technical-Terms.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-28.
  6. ^ "vBulletin Community forum - FAQ: Registration". vBulletin.com. http://www.vbulletin.com/forum/faq.php?faq=vb3_board_usage#faq_vb3_register. Retrieved on 2008-09-14.
  7. ^ "phpBB FAQ: Why do I need to register at all?". phpBB.com. http://www.phpbb.com/community/faq.php#f01. Retrieved on 2008-09-14.
  8. ^ "phpBB FAQ: What is COPPA?". phpBB.com. http://www.phpbb.com/community/faq.php#f07. Retrieved on 2008-09-14.
  9. ^ "vBulletin Options - User registration". vBulletin.com. http://www.vbulletin.com/docs/html/. Retrieved on 2008-09-15.
  10. ^ http://www.wired.com/culture/lifestyle/news/2007/04/2channel
  11. ^ "phpBB FAQ: How can I report posts to a moderator?". phpBB.com. http://www.phpbb.com/community/faq.php#f29. Retrieved on 2008-09-14.
  12. ^ a b "vBulletin FAQ: Dealing with Troublesome Users". vBulletin.com. http://www.vbulletin.com/forum/faq.php?faq=vb3_board_usage#faq_vb3_troublesome_users. Retrieved on 2008-09-14.
  13. ^ "Community Rules 1c". phpBB.com. "Members are asked to not act as 'back seat moderators'. If members note an issue which contravenes something in this policy document they are welcome to bring it to the attention of a member of the Moderator Team. Please use the 'post report' feature to report posts. Do not respond to such topics yourself. Members who constantly 'act' as moderators may be warned."
  14. ^ "Censorship Options". vBulletin.com. http://www.vbulletin.com/docs/html/vboptions_group_censor. Retrieved on 2008-10-30.
  15. ^ "3.4.5. Word censoring". PhpBB.com. http://www.phpbb.com/support/documentation/3.0/adminguide/acp_posting.php#acp_posting_censors. Retrieved on 2008-10-30.
  16. ^ "vBulletin Manual: User Groups and Permissions". vBulletin. http://www.vbulletin.com/docs/html/vb2_manual_cp_usergroups. Retrieved on 2008-11-04.
  17. ^ "PlayStation.com Forums New User Guide.". playstation.com. http://boardsus.playstation.com/playstation/board/message?board.id=announcements&message.id=16#modteam. Retrieved on 2008-12-22.
  18. ^ a b "vBulletin FAQ: Moderators and Administrators". vBulletin.com. http://www.vbulletin.com/forum/faq.php?faq=vb3_reading_posting#faq_vb3_mods_admins. Retrieved on 2008-09-14.
  19. ^ "PhpBB FAQ: How can I add / remove users to my Friends or Foes list?". PhpBB.com. http://www.phpbb.com/community/faq.php?#f61. Retrieved on 2008-09-14.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Computer-mediated communication  
Online chat, Online discussion, Communication software, Collaborative software  
Asynchronous conferencing

E-mail â¢ Electronic mailing list â¢ Internet forum â¢ Shoutbox â¢ Wiki  
Synchronous conferencing

Data conferencing â¢ Instant messaging â¢ LAN messenger â¢
Videoconferencing â¢ Voice chat â¢ VoIP â¢ Talker â¢ Web chat â¢ Web
conferencing  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_forum"

Categories: Groupware | Internet forums | On-line chat | Social information
processing

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Walon
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ
  * ç²µèª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 15:16.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



