
# Antidisestablishmentarianism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Move protected

Sister project Look up Antidisestablishmentarianism in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
Antidisestablishmentarianism (listen to British sample (info), American sample
(info)) is a political position that originated in nineteenth-century Britain,
in opposition to proposals to remove the Church of England's status as the
state church of Ireland and Wales.

In Ireland the Church of Ireland was disestablished in 1871. In Wales four
Church of England dioceses were disestablished in 1920, subsequently becoming
the Church in Wales. Antidisestablishmentarian members of the Free Church of
Scotland delayed merger with the United Presbyterian Church of Scotland in a
dispute about the position of the Church of Scotland.

The term has largely fallen into disuse; however, the issue itself is still
current (see Act of Settlement 1701).

## Contents

  * 1 Word length
  * 2 References
    * 2.1 Bibliography
    * 2.2 Notes

  
## [edit] Word length

The word "antidisestablishmentarianism" itself is often referenced in English-
speaking popular culture due to its unusual length of 28 letters and 12
syllables. It is commonly believed to be the longest word in the English
language, excluding coined and technical terms not found in major
dictionaries.

Longer words typically have been coined by specific authors in relatively
modern times, or are obscure technical names. For example,
floccinaucinihilipilification, first used in prose by William Shenstone in
1741, is 29 letters long, but was thought to have been coined as a nonsense
word by a single person or small group of students at Eton. It is rumoured
that this was intended to mean "to value something at nothing" or to describe
a lack of value. Another nonsense word specifically coined to be the 'longest
word in the English language' is Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious from the
song of the same name in the film Mary Poppins. Chlorofluorocarbonation is
also a word that is almost as long as antidisestablishmentarianism, meaning,
"the act of putting chlorofluorocarbons into the air."

Recently, the 2007 edition of Guinness Book of World Records listed
"pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis" as the longest word in the
English language. The medical term is a lung disease, caused by the
"inhalation of very fine silica dust from volcanoes." The disease may make it
harder to breathe, and people with it need to be hooked up to a lung machine
(an artificial lung). This too was a purposely coined word, with the explicit
intent of being a long word.[1] The condition described is more conventionally
referred to as "silicosis".

## [edit] References

Listen to this article (info/dl)  

Play sound

Spoken Wikipedia

This audio file was created from a revision dated 2008-04-28, and does not
reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)

More spoken articles

This is a spoken version of the article. Click here to listen.

### [edit] Bibliography

  * Adrian Hastings, Church and state : the English experience (Exeter : University of Exeter Press, 1991.)
  * Antidisestablishmentarianism in the Online Etymology Dictionary

### [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Cole, Chris (1999). Wordplay, A Curious Dictionary of Language Oddities. Sterling Publishing Co., Inc.. pp. pp. 106 - 107. ISBN 0-8069-1797-0.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antidisestablishmentarianism"

Categories: Spoken articles | Political theories | History of the Church of
England | Church of England disestablishment

Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages move-protected due to vandalism | Articles
including recorded pronunciations (English)

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * Nederlands
  * Simple English
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 16 April 2009, at 22:33 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



