
# Snipe hunt

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2008)  
## Contents

  * 1 Fool's errand
    * 1.1 Common items
    * 1.2 US Army
  * 2 Regional cryptids
  * 3 See also
  * 4 Further reading
  * 5 References

  
A snipe hunt, a form of wild goose chase that is also known as a fool's
errand, is a type of practical joke that involves experienced people making
fun of newcomers by giving them an impossible or imaginary task. The origin of
the term is a practical joke where inexperienced campers are told about a bird
or animal called the snipe as well as a usually ridiculous method of catching
it, such as running around the woods carrying a bag or making strange noises.
Incidentally, the snipe (a family of shorebirds) is difficult to catch for
experienced hunters, so much so that the word "sniper" is derived from it to
refer to anyone skilled enough to shoot one.[1]

In the most popular version of the snipe hunt, especially in the American
South, a newcomer is taken deep into the woods late at night and told to make
a clucking noise while holding a large sack. The others, who are in on the
joke, say that after they sneak away they will walk back towards the newcomer,
thereby driving snipes towards the bag holder. The frightened snipes, they say
will be attracted to the clucking noise and easily caught in the bag. The
newcomer is then simply left in the dark forest, eventually to realize his
gullibility and find his way home or back to camp.

A wild goose chase can also be more serious, either a deliberate attempt to
thwart an opponent by sending him/her off on a quest based on misinformation,
or a mistake on one's own part leading to a hopeless quest. [2]

## [edit] Fool's errand

A fool's errand is a task that cannot be accomplished because of fate or
because it is a joke. It comes mainly in two varieties: trying to find
something that does not exist, or trying to accomplish an impossible task.
Others who are aware of the prank will often redirect the victim to several
different places.

The prank often involves the use of jargon, where the immediate meaning is not
obvious. It can also depend on a new recruit's unfamiliarity with the
business. Such as being sent on a search for an ID10T form (IDIOT).

In carny, a type of fool's errand is known as the key to the midway.

### [edit] Common items

  * Homonyms: long stand, long weight (wait), or a long felt want, shoreline.
  * Impossible items: a length of WLAN cable for wireless LAN, dehydrated water. In the Navy, the victim is sent for batteries for the sound-powered phones, which, being powered by acoustic energy, do not require batteries. Other Navy snipe hunts are for the elusive "shore line", as in the Navy rope is called line so a common phrase would be "Hey Smith, go find me 10 feet of shore line." In the Army, there is a long list, including a box of grid squares (spatial referents on a map), chem light batteries, (parachute) canopy lights, keys to the drop zone or an aircraft, or having someone gather exhaust samples in garbage bags from trucks or equipment.
  * Imaginary or pointless items: left-handed smoke shifter, a current brush for electrical outlets, a plinth ladder, Turboencabulator, and a Johnson Rod.
  * Machinery parts that sound real, but if considering the actual machine, cannot exist: muffler bearings, piston return spring, canooter valve or headlight fluid.
  * Tools that do not exist, such as a shelf-stretcher, or left-handed versions of achiral tools (wrench, hammer, or screwdriver), or tools made out of unlikely materials such as hammers made of glass. (Left-Handed Hammers DO exist, and are certainly NOT Achiral in all cases, Certainly their are also similar Right-Handed versions such as a popular Ridgid Brand hammer that was available at The Home Depot (tm)).
  * Fetching a quantity of something that can't be contained, e.g. a bucket of vacuum, A bubble for a spirit level, steam, flight line, striped paint, prop wash or sparks (especially sparks from a grinder).
  * Things that have no physical existence, such as telling an orchestra member in whose part is written tacet to 'go find the tacet', as if it were a musical instrument.
  * In the restaurant industry, new kitchen hires are often told to go to neighboring restaurants to get "ice mix". If the neighboring restaurant is a pizzeria, they can be sent for a "wooden skillet".
  * Items that are ridiculous, such as tartan paint.

### [edit] US Army

  * Guard the flight line.
  * Individual is sent to his platoon sergeant to find a PRKY-7 (Prick E-7, signal corps specific).
  * New tanker is given a ball-peen hammer and chalk and told to find and mark the soft spots in an M1 Abrams' armor (There are none, and as such, the Tank Commander would return to the sight of his tank marked with chalk and possibly marks from the hammer).
  * Individual is sent to the motor pool for Blinker fluid. (turn signals)
  * Individual is sent to look for Lanyard Grease.

## [edit] Regional cryptids

Many regions have a cryptid or imaginary being used as a snipe hunt. In
Bavaria, tourists were taken on extended expeditions to search for chamois
eggs, or on all-night Wolpertinger stakeouts. In Scotland, tourists are told
about the wild haggis hunts, while in the Western United States, they may be
warned about the savage jackalope. In Australia, foreigners may be warned to
remain alert for drop bears, mythical creatures that are a popular joke
amongst the locals. In Wyoming, natives warn tourists to watch out for
rattlesnake eggs (Rattlesnakes don't lay eggs; they give birth to live
offspring).

In France, in Switzerland and in the north of Italy, particularly in mountains
like the Alps or the Jura Mountains, tourists are sent to hunt the "dahu", an
imaginary mammal whose left legs are shorter than its right legs, so that it
can walk easily along a mountain slope. A practical way to hunt the beast is
to call him from the back: it turns around and falls, because of its long legs
on the top and his short legs on the bottom.

## [edit] See also

  * Fearsome Critters
  * Key to the midway

## [edit] Further reading

  * The Little Red Book of Firehouse Pranks by Jeff Hibbard (ISBN 0-9667810-0-7)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Harper, Douglas. "snipe (n.)". Online Etymology Dictionary. http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=snipe. Retrieved on 1 April 2009.
  2. ^ Wild goose chase

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snipe_hunt"

Categories: Practical jokes | In-jokes | Hoaxes | Fictional activities |
American folklore legendary creatures

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * PortuguÃªs

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 24 April 2009, at 17:08 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



