
# Etiquette in Japan

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

  (Redirected from Customs and etiquette of Japan)

Jump to: navigation, search

The code of etiquette in Japan governs the expectations of social behavior in
the country and is considered very important. Many books instruct readers on
its minutiae.

Some customs here may be very regional practices, and thus may not exist in
all regions of Japan. The following are generally accepted modern customs in
Japan. Some customs have changed over the course of history.

## Contents

  * 1 Bathing
  * 2 Bowing
  * 3 Making payment
  * 4 Eating and drinking
    * 4.1 Obento
    * 4.2 Fast food
    * 4.3 Chopsticks
  * 5 Visiting someone's house
  * 6 Gifts and gift-giving
    * 6.1 Seasonal gifts
    * 6.2 Other gifts
    * 6.3 Souvenirs
  * 7 Greetings
  * 8 Hospitality
  * 9 Letters and postcards
    * 9.1 Titles
    * 9.2 Letter writing materials
    * 9.3 Seasonal greetings
    * 9.4 Greeting postcards
  * 10 Respectful language
  * 11 Service and public employees
  * 12 Weddings
  * 13 Funerals
  * 14 Working ethics
  * 15 Special birthdays
  * 16 Business etiquette
  * 17 See also
  * 18 Footnotes and references
  * 19 External links

  
## [edit] Bathing

<IMG>

<IMG>

A private furo in a ryokan

Bathing is an important part of the daily routine in Japan. Baths are for
relaxing; the body and hair must be thoroughly scrubbed and all soap removed
before entering the bathtub or furo (é¢¨å). This is normally done at a small
faucet or shower located in the same room as the tub, while seated on a small
stool. Traditionally, the tub water would be used to wash the body by scooping
it up with the provided scoop. The traditional shape of the tub is smaller and
deeper than is common in Western homes. A traditional Japanese bathtub is
square, and deep enough that the water will cover the shoulders, but requires
the bather to sit with the knees drawn up to the chest. Newer bathtubs are
more like the western shape. Rather than being drained at the end of each
bath, the water is kept warm by means of special heaters, and the same water
is used by all the family members. After use, some homes take the hot bath
water from the tub and use it to wash clothes in a washing machine. A lid is
placed on the tub to maintain the water temperature when not in use, and to
prevent evaporation. Any hair or debris is scooped from the water after the
bath.

In homes with small tubs, each family member bathes one by one, in order of
seniority, traditionally starting with the oldest male. However, many young
Japanese women now refuse to bathe after their fathers.[citation needed] If
there are guests in the home, they will be given priority. In homes with
larger tubs, it is not uncommon for family members to bathe together.
Typically one or both parents will bathe with babies and toddlers, and even as
children grow older they may still bathe with one of their parents.

Bathtubs are increasingly common in modern Japanese homes, but there are still
many homes, particularly in older or rural areas, that don't have bathtubs, so
public bathhouses called sentÅ (é­æ¹¯) are common. A regular bathhouse will
have tap water heated in a boiler. In all but the most rural areas baths are
segregated by sex, and customers bathe nude, many using a small washcloth to
cover the genitals. Hotels, pachinko parlours and other venues may have on-
site sentÅ for customer use.

<IMG>

<IMG>

1901 image of sentÅ.

Patrons of traditional Japanese inns or ryokan will be offered the use of a
furo for bathing, either a communal one with bathing times being scheduled in
advance, or a private one.

Onsen (æ¸©æ³) are baths that by definition use naturally hot water from
geothermally-heated springs, sometimes outdoors. Larger onsen will have
separate pools for men and women, and visitors normally bathe nude. As with
home baths, at sentÅ and onsen bathers must wash thoroughly before entering
the communal baths. Many sentÅ and onsen ban customers with tattoos which are
traditionally taboo, citing concerns over yakuza activity. Very rarely, non-
Japanese visitors are banned, a practice regarded as xenophobia. The
bathhouses respond that non-Japanese, particularly Russian sailors visiting
HokkaidÅ in northern Japan, are unfamiliar with the correct etiquette and
either dirty the bathwater or behave inappropriately. For a recent, well-
publicised example, see Debito Arudou.

## [edit] Bowing

Main article: Bowing (social)

Bowing (o)jigi (ãè¾å, ããã), (o-)rei (ãç¤¼), is probably the
feature of Japanese etiquette that is best-known outside Japan. Bowing is
considered extremely important in Japan, so much so that, although children
normally begin learning how to bow from a very young age, companies commonly
provide training to their employees in how to execute bows correctly.

Basic bows are performed with the back straight and the hands at the sides
(boys and men) or clasped in the lap (girls and women), and with the eyes
down. Bows originate at the waist. Generally, the longer and deeper the bow,
the stronger the emotion and the respect expressed.

Bows can be generally divided into three main types: informal, formal, and
very formal. Informal bows are made at about a fifteen degree angle and more
formal bows at about thirty degrees. Very formal bows are deeper.

The etiquette surrounding bowing, including the length and depth of bow, and
the appropriate response, is exceedingly complex. For example, if the other
person maintains his or her bow for longer than expected (generally about two
or three seconds), it is polite to bow again, upon which one may receive
another bow in return. This often leads to a long exchange of progressively
lighter bows.

Generally speaking, an inferior bows longer, more deeply and more frequently
than a superior. A superior addressing an inferior will generally only nod the
head slightly, while some superiors may not bow at all and an inferior will
bend forward slightly from the waist.

Bows of apology tend to be deeper and last longer than other types of bow.
They tend to occur with frequency during the apology, generally at about 45
degrees with the head lowered and lasting for at least the count of three,
sometimes longer. The depth, frequency and duration of the bow increases with
the sincerity of the apology and the severity of the offence. Bows of thanks
follow the same pattern. In extreme cases a kneeling bow is performed; this
bow is sometimes so deep that the forehead touches the floor. This is called
saikeirei (ææ¬ç¤¼), literally "most respectful bow."

When dealing with non-Japanese people, many Japanese will shake hands. Since
many non-Japanese are familiar with the custom of bowing, this often leads to
a combined bow and handshake which can be quite complicated to execute. Bows
may be combined with handshakes or performed before or after shaking hands.
Generally when bowing in close proximity, as necessitated when combining
bowing and shaking hands, people turn slightly to one side (usually the left)
to avoid bumping heads.

## [edit] Making payment

Instead of handing a cashier cash from one's hands to the cashier's hands, it
is a commonplace practice in Japan to place the money onto a small tray that
is placed specifically for the purpose near the cashier machine. Not following
this rule is considered rude in Japanese culture, however convenience stores
(kombini) normally do not stick strictly to this rule.

## [edit] Eating and drinking

Meals in Japan traditionally begin with the phrase itadakimasu (ããã
ãã¾ã ?) (literally, "I receive"). The phrase is similar to the phrase
"bon appÃ©tit," or grace, used in the case of some individuals, at every meal.
It is said to express gratitude for all who had a part in preparing the food,
and in cultivating, ranching or hunting edible food of plants and animals.
This originates in the consideration that living organisms are giving their
life to human beings as DÄna.[1][2] Upon finishing a meal, the Japanese also
use the polite phrase gochisÅsama [disambiguation needed] deshita
(ãã¡ãããã¾ã§ãã ?) or - more informal/simple - gochisÅsama
(ãã¡ãããã¾ ?). GochisÅsama is also based on the religious belief
where chisÅ (é¦³èµ°;ã¡ãã ?) means running with efforts (by riding a
horse, thereby indicating expedience) to cater foods for the guest, then
linguistically altered to express gratitude to their efforts with adding go
and sama as the form of teineigo (ä¸å¯§èª).[3][4][5][6] To join one's hands
in the namastÃ© gesture while saying these words is good manners. (See also
Mottainai as buddhist philosophy.)

It is considered polite to clear one's plate; children are especially
encouraged to do so. It is impolite to pick out certain ingredients and leave
the rest. One should chew with the mouth closed.

It is acceptable to lift soup and rice bowls to your mouth so that you don't
spill food. It is also appropriate to slurp certain foods, especially ramen or
soba noodles, though this is not practiced universally.

Rice is generally eaten plain or sometimes with nori (dried-pressed seaweed)
or furikake (various seasonings). Pouring soy sauce onto plain white rice is
not a Japanese custom, nor is it common to pour soy sauce directly over
sashimi or sushi. Instead, soy sauce is poured into a small dish that is
provided, and the food dipped into the sauce. Furthermore, to pour an
excessive amount of soy sauce into the small dish is considered greedy and
wasteful. When eating nigiri-zushi, one should dip the sushi topping side down
into the sauce; leaving stray grains of rice floating in the sauce is
considered uncouth (but rather hard to avoid for those who have difficulty
with chopsticks). In sushi-only restaurants, it is acceptable to use fingers
instead of chopsticks to eat the nigiri-zushi.

It is still uncommon for Japanese people to eat while walking about. Some
consider it rude to eat in public or on trains, but this is not a universally-
held belief.

Many Japanese restaurants provide diners with single-use wooden chopsticks
that must be snapped apart. Chopsticks taper toward the bottom; the thicker
top part, which will be snapped apart, will have small splinters. Clearly, one
should never use the thick, splintered end to pick up food. In order to remove
the splinters, it is acceptable to rub one chopstick against the other;
however, the common practice of placing both chopsticks between the palms and
vigorously clattering them together is not only annoying but extremely rude,
especially when you are seated at a sushi bar.

In Japanese restaurants, customers are given a rolled hand towel called
oshibori (ãçµã ?). It is considered rude to use the towel to wipe the
face or neck; however, some people, usually men, do this at more informal
restaurants. Nonwoven towelettes are replacing the cloth oshibori.

When using tooth picks, it is good etiquette to cover one's mouth with the
other hand. Blowing one's nose is considered rude in public, especially at a
restaurant, and a cloth handkerchief should never be used for the purpose. It
is polite to cover one's nose with the hand, or excuse oneself to the restroom
first.

### [edit] Obento

Obento, boxed meals in Japan, are very common and constitute an important
ritual during lunch. The preparation of these meals begins around the time
children reach nursery school. The mothers of these children take special care
when preparing their childrenâs meals. They arrange the food in the order by
which it will be consumed. Obento are made fancy, âbut it must be consumed
in its entirety.â[7]

Obento is judged by how well it is prepared. The mother must almost âshow
offâ her accomplishment in making the lunch. She is preparing for her child,
but the way she prepares it is looked upon by the other children and the
nursery school. Itâs almost like a competition, to see who is the better
mother. If it is well prepared, that must mean you are a good mother, in the
eyes of the Japanese.[7]

Because appearance with food is important in Japan, the mothers must be sure
to arrange and make the obento attractive.[7] If it is not to specification,
and the mother is not happy, then she is to re-arrange until she is satisfied
with the appearance as a whole. Sometimes they may make cut-outs of certain
foods, like heart shapes, or even characters popular to Japan. Foods can also
be seasonal. A mother may prepare a leaf cut-out of fall colors, like a carrot
if itâs fall. She may also prepare an orange in the shape of a flower if the
season is summer. It is not uncommon to see 6 or 7 different courses within
that small sized box.

Mothers are also encouraged to prepare what the children will enjoy eating. If
the child does not like what the mother has prepared, then he/she will most
likely not consume it, going against the rule that âit must be consumed in
its entirety.â[7] So, mothers must be careful in choosing foods. They must
be of interest to the child so that he/she will eat the entire lunch.

While obento is important in preparing for younger children, it is also
popular with older children and adults. Obento is very common throughout
Japan, but you many not see it as attractive as a childâs obento that is in
nursery school. Because nursery school is the first school the child will
attend, this is why the mothers must take time and more effort to prepare this
childâs meal. As the children get older, obento is still prepared, but not
to this extreme. The mother will still prepare what the older children will
eat, but may not take the time to make special cut-outs or prepare them in a
special fashion.

### [edit] Fast food

McDonald's, Kentucky Fried Chicken and other fast food can be found in Japan
without much difficulty; fast food restaurants are fairly easy to come by in
Japan. Also common are food stands or even carts on trains, at stations, or on
the streets. âThese stand-up, take-out, or ready-made foods have long
provided quick meals and snacks for the Japanese. Indeed, one of the oldest
fast food chains, Yoshinoya, has been in business since 1899.â[8]

### [edit] Chopsticks

Main article: Chopsticks

There are many traditions and unwritten rules surrounding the use of
chopsticks. For example, it is considered particularly taboo to pass food from
chopsticks to chopsticks, as this is how bones are handled by the family of
the deceased after a cremation. If you must pass food from your plate to
someone during a meal (a questionable practice in public), pick up the food
with your own chopsticks and place it on a small plate to allow the recipient
to pick it up with his/her chopsticks. Mismatched chopsticks are not to be
used. Standing chopsticks vertically in a bowl of rice is to be avoided, as it
recalls burning incense sticks standing up in sand, typically at funerals.
Also, the act of stabbing the chopsticks into the food resembles an action
devout Buddhists perform when offering ceremonial food to their ancestors at
the household shrine.

Chopsticks have been in use in Japan as early as the Nara period in (710-794),
they originally started in China and swept to Japan. (Bridging the Gap, 2008)
Since chopsticks (hashi) are a huge part of Japanese tradition, there are many
things one must avoid while using them. If you have no other utensils to use
while sharing plates of food, you will need to use the end of the chopsticks
(the side you did not eat from) to retrieve the shared food.

Chopsticks can be somewhat challenging if you have never used them. They can
take a lot of practice for most, but once you have used them a few times, you
will get used to them easily. "Using chopsticks correctly makes you look
beautiful when eatingâ¦â (Bridging the Gap, 2008) Since there are many
chopsticks one can choose from, you want to make sure the ones you choose are
comfortable and easy to handle. You donât want them too heavy or too long.
They must fit your fingers and feel right. âAccording to Hyozaemon, you
should hold your chopsticks at a point about two-thirds of the way up from the
tips. Hold the top chopstick between your thumb and index finger and support
it with your middle finger. Your other chopstick should be placed firmly
against where your thumb and index finger meet, with it supported against the
fingernail on your ring finger. By doing this, the tips of your chopsticks
will meet, forming a beaklike triangle. If you can use them dexterously by
only moving the upper chopstick, you've got perfect chopstick manners.â
(Bridging the Gap, 2008)

## [edit] Visiting someone's house

<IMG>

<IMG>

Wooden step into a Japanese hotel, where one should take off one's shoes and
wear the house slippers provided.

It is considered an honor to be invited to one's home in Japan. Many Japanese
regard their homes to be too humble to entertain guests. Wooden geta are
provided for short walks outside when entering the house. As far as the floor
level is higher than ground or entrance level or even the level is the same,
Japanese don't want the floor be stained by soil, sands or dust (possibly)
attached to bottom of footwear. It is generally considered polite to wear
shoes instead of sandals, but sandal wearers may carry a pair of white socks
to put over their bare feet or stockings, so that their bare feet will not
touch the slippers that the host offers. The shoes are turned around so that
the toe faces the door after taking them off. If, during the winter time, a
guest is wearing a coat or hat, the guest will take it off before the host
opens the door. When the guest is leaving, he or she does not put on the coat
or hat until the door has closed.

## [edit] Gifts and gift-giving

<IMG>

<IMG>

Â¥10000 (approx. $100) melon, carefully selected for its lack of
imperfections, intended as a gift in the Japanese custom of gift-giving.

Many people will ask a guest to open a gift, but if they do not, the Japanese
will resist the urge to ask if they can open the gift. Since the act of
accepting a gift can create a sense of unfulfilled obligation on the part of
the receiver, gifts are sometimes refused, depending on the situation.

### [edit] Seasonal gifts

There are two gift seasons in Japan, called seibo (æ­³æ® ?) and chÅ«gen (ä¸­å
 ?). One is for winter and the other is for summer. Gifts are given to those
with whom one has a relationship, especially the people who have helped the
gift giver.

It is considered impolite to go to someone's house without a gift. In Japanese
this is called tebura (æã¶ã ?) (empty-handed). A gift is usually brought
in a paper bag (preferably a bag from the shop where you bought the gift) and
is taken out of the bag, which is placed underneath the gift when giving it to
the host, using both hands. The gift is often presented when shown into the
living room, saying "tsumaranai mono desu ga"ãã¤ã¾ããªããã®ã§ãã
(literally "it is something not that much but...") to show modesty. However,
in business or professional situations, one should avoid framing the gift in
such terms, as it denotes the insignificance of the gift and therefore
belittles the recipient's worth. Phrases such as
"ã»ãã®ãå°ï¼ãããï¼ã§ãããã¾ãã" (meaning, "it only
amounts to a symbol of my appreciation, but...", implies gratitude towards the
recipient that the giver cannot fully express) fits well under professional
and societal etiquettes. If the host offers something, it is polite to make a
soft declination saying "okizukai naku" ãæ°ã¥ãããªã (please don't go
through the trouble), but the guest can gladly accept if the host asks for the
second time.

### [edit] Other gifts

Another custom in Japan is for women to give men chocolate on Valentine's Day.
The chocolate can be given to the object of the woman's affection, or to any
man the woman is connected to. The latter is called giri-choko
(ç¾©çãã§ã³ ?) (obligation chocolate). This custom is also performed by
the male one month after Valentine's Day, called White Day.

### [edit] Souvenirs

In tourist spots in Japan, souvenirs are a big business. There are souvenir
stands at train stations selling gifts from far-away areas for those who are
returning and forgot to buy or didn't want to carry around a gift. There are
also services that deliver regional souvenirs from places in Japan or from
foreign countries to be used as souvenirs.

## [edit] Greetings

Greetings are considered to be of extreme importance in Japanese culture.
Students in elementary and secondary schools are often admonished to deliver
greetings with energy and vigor. A lazy greeting is regarded with the type of
disdain that would accompany a limp handshake in parts of the West.

Simply walking off without saying anything is frowned upon. When parting,
instead of simply saying goodbye, it is common to make a wish to meet again.

The most common greetings are ohayÅ gozaimasu (ãã¯ãããããã¾ã ?)
or "good morning", used until about 11am but may be used at any time of day if
it is the first occasion that day the two people have met; konnichiwa
(ããã«ã¡ã¯ ?) which is roughly equivalent to "good day" or "good
afternoon" and is used until late afternoon; konbanwa (ä»æ©ã¯ ?) or "good
evening"; and oyasuminasai (ãä¼ã¿ãªãã ?) or "good night". Different
forms of these greetings may be used depending on the relative social statuses
of the speaker and the listener; see respectful language below.

## [edit] Hospitality

Since many Japanese homes are very small, entertaining is traditionally done
at restaurants and other establishments. Entertaining at home is not unheard
of, however, and hosts will often go to great lengths to be hospitable.

Generally, as in many other cultures, the guest takes priority. He or she will
be seated in the best place, served the best food and drinks, and generally
deferred to. If staying overnight, the guest will also be offered the first
bath, and the hosts may even give up their own beds.

Japanese hosts generally try for the ideal of being busy so the guest can
relax. As opposed to Western hospitality styles where the host presents a
relaxed front to the guests or may encourage guests to "make themselves at
home" or "help themselves," Japanese hosts will often present a busy front to
guests. The general aim is to cultivate the idea among guests that everything
is being taken care of so that they may relax and be at ease.

## [edit] Letters and postcards

Letter-writing remains an important part of Japanese culture, despite the
advent of email and text-messaging. In Japan letter-writing skills are
dependent not upon the ability to be original but rather on the ability to
follow the prescribed format. However, some forms of letters, such as
e-tegami, or "picture-letters", which incorporate hand-painted decorations,
often seasonal motifs, certainly require creativity.

### [edit] Titles

Main article: Japanese titles

Letter addresses, even those sent to close friends, are normally written in
quite formal language. Unless some other title is available (sensei, for
example, which can mean "doctor" or "professor" among other things) the
standard title used with the addressee's name is the very formal sama. Letters
addressed to a company take the title onchÅ« (å¾¡ä¸­ ?) after the company
name. It is also considered important to mention in the address if the company
is incorporated (kabushiki gaisha) or limited (yÅ«gen gaisha). When a letter
is addressed to a company employee at their place of work, the address should
contain the full name of the place of work, as well as the title of the
employee's position, and the full name of the employee. The titles are -chan
(for female friends or younger people) or -kun (for male friends, or in
certain cases to women), -san (for adults in general) and -sama (which is also
used for gods or buddhas).

### [edit] Letter writing materials

Personal letters are traditionally written by hand using blue or black ink, or
with a writing brush and black ink. The preferred paper is washi (Japanese
paper). Letters may be written vertically (tategaki) or horizontally
(yokogaki), but vertical is the traditional, and therefore more formal,
direction.

### [edit] Seasonal greetings

A letter typically opens with a seasonal greeting. A typical example
incorporates a remark about the temperature, rain, snow, and so on. These
greetings are often quite poetic, and include observations about the changing
colors of the leaves or the emergence of spring flowers. The seasonal greeting
is followed by an inquiry about the addressee's health, and a report of one's
own. The first paragraph of a typical letter might thus read as follows:

> The hot weather of summer has finally passed. The days are getting cooler
and the leaves are turning vivid colors. How have you been? Thankfully, I have
been getting along well.

The second paragraph is devoted to news about the writer. Requests, if any,
will likely not appear until at least the third paragraph. Letters close with
greetings to others, and with one of a number of standard phrases urging the
reader to "take care." A typical example might be:

> Please send my regards to your wife. Now that the weather is getting cooler,
please take care of yourself.

### [edit] Greeting postcards

In Japan, holiday-goers do not send postcards. Instead, the tradition in Japan
is for a holiday goer to bring back a souvenir, often edible (see "Gifts and
gift-giving"). However, New Year's greeting postcards, or nengajÅ (å¹´è³ç¶
?), are a tradition similar to Christmas cards in the West. If sent within a
time limit, the Japanese post office will deliver the cards on the morning of
New Year's Day. These are decorated with motifs based on the year of the
Chinese zodiac which is starting. They request the addressee's continued favor
in the new year. If one receives a card from someone to whom one has not sent
a card, etiquette dictates that one must send a card in return, to arrive no
later than the seventh of January.

However, if a relative of a person has died during that year, they will send a
postcard written in black before the New Year apologizing for not sending a
New Year's card. The rationale for this is that since their relative has died
they cannot wish or experience a happy new year. In this case, the etiquette
is not to send them a New Year's Greeting either.

See also Japanese New Year.

## [edit] Respectful language

Main article: Honorific speech in Japanese

There is an entire grammatical rule-set for speaking respectfully to
superiors, customers, etc., and this plays a large part in good etiquette.
Harmony is a key value in Japanese society and is the guiding philosophy for
the Japanese in family and business settings and in society as a whole.
Japanese children are taught to act harmoniously and cooperatively with others
from the time they go to pre-school.

This need for harmonious relationships between people is reflected in much
Japanese behaviour. They place great emphasis on politeness, personal
responsibility and working together for the universal, rather than the
individual, good. They present facts that might be disagreeable in a gentle
and indirect fashion. They see working in harmony as the crucial ingredient
for working productively.[9]

## [edit] Service and public employees

Japan is frequently cited by non-Japanese as a place where service is
excellent. Such claims are difficult, if not impossible, to quantify.
Nevertheless, service at public establishments such as restaurants, drinking
places, shops and services is generally friendly, attentive and very polite,
as reflected in a common reminder given by managers and employers to their
employees: "okyaku-sama wa kami-sama desu" (ãå®¢æ§ã¯ç¥æ§ã§ã), or "the
customer is a god." Generally, service employees will seldom engage in casual
conversation with a customer with the aim of forming a closer friendship or
romantic relationship as sometimes happens in "western" cultures. The service
employees are expected to maintain a more formal, professional relationship
with all customers. Private conversations among service staff are considered
not appropriate when a customer is near.

In general, as in most countries, etiquette dictates that the customer is
treated with reverence. In Japan this means that employees speak in a humble
and deferential manner and use respectful forms of language that elevate the
customer. Thus, customers are typically addressed with the title \--sama
(roughly equivalent to "sir" or "madam" in English).

Dress for employees is normally neat and formal, depending on the type and
style of establishment. Public employees such as police officers, taxi
drivers, and the pushers whose job is to ensure that as many people as
possible board the rush-hour trains--and other types of employees who must
touch people--often wear white gloves.

## [edit] Weddings

It is traditional for wedding guests to provide a monetary gift in a stylized,
sealed envelope. The money is understood to be used to cover the cost of the
wedding and party. Depending on the group of people involved, people of higher
status may be expected to give more, or there may be a decided amount. The
amount is often 30.000ï¿¥ and the number of bank notes should be odd, since
even numbers can be divided into two and thus unlucky for the couple. In
addition, the amount of 40.000ï¿¥ is inappropriate, as 4 phonetically sounds
like "death" in Japanese.

Wedding guests may receive wedding gifts, in a kind of reverse-wedding
registry situation. Near the wedding date, guests may receive a catalog of
gifts available for them to choose from.

## [edit] Funerals

Main article: Japanese funeral

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2008)  
People at Japanese funerals bring money in funeral envelopes. When giving
money, it is customary to give used notes, rather than new ones, to give the
impression of 'unexpectedness' of the death. People attending participate in
the entire or at least either ceremony, which may include the wake the night
before the funeral in next daytime; the cremation is usually reserved for
family, relatives and colleagues . At funerals people bow to the family when
they go to the front. People at funerals typically wear black or dark clothes,
with all black as preferable, at least with black necktie in hastening. For
women the only jewellery considered acceptable is pearls, due to their
understated nature.

## [edit] Working ethics

Japanese people generally arrive early and are prepared to start working as
soon as work hours begin. They also praise other workers for support, even
when they have been of little help in succeeding. When leaving work, the
greeting otsukaresama deshita "You're tired" is often used to those leaving,
and the person who is leaving often says osaki ni shitsurei shimasu "I'm sorry
to leave before you." For many workers, it is considered poor form to leave
before the boss goes home.

## [edit] Special birthdays

Sixty

The sixtieth birthday is the occasion of kanreki, éæ¦, when five cycles of
the Chinese zodiac have completed.

Seventy-seven

The seventy-seventh birthday is the occasion of kiju åå¯¿, "happy age",
because the pronunciation of Chinese character å is similar to seven.

Eighty-eight

The eighty-eighth birthday is the occasion of beiju ç±³å¯¿, "rice age",
because the Chinese character for rice, ç±³, looks like the characters for
eighty-eight (å «åå «).

Ninety-nine

The ninety-ninth birthday is the occasion of hakuju ç½å¯¿, "white age",
because the Chinese character for white, ç½, looks like the Chinese character
for one hundred, ç¾, with the top stroke removed.

## [edit] Business etiquette

Main article: Meishi

## [edit] See also

  * Culture of Japan
  * Japanese cuisine
  * Japanese language
  * Intercultural competence

## [edit] Footnotes and references

  1. ^ ããã®ã¡ããããã ãã¦ãèªåã®ããã®ã¡ããé¤ã£ã¦ãã (literary:Receive other life to foster own life) Jodo Shinshu (Japanese)
  2. ^ Tomoko Oguara (å°åæå­) (2008-08-10). "ãããã ãã¾ãããå¿ããæ¥æ¬äºº (literary: Japanese, people forgot itadakimasu)" (in Japanese). ASCII Media Works ISBN 978-4-04-867287-2. p. 68. http://www.ascii.co.jp/books/books/detail/978-4-04-867287-0.shtml.
  3. ^ é¦³èµ°ã¨ã¯ (literary:meaning of chisÅ) Sanseido Daijirin (Japanese)
  4. ^ å¾¡é¦³èµ°æ§ (ãã¡ãããã¾;gochisÅsama) SÅtÅ (Japanese)
  5. ^ å¾¡é¦³èµ°ï¼ãã¡ãã;gochisÅï¼(Japanese)
  6. ^ ãã¡ããã®ãé¦³èµ°ãã®æå³ï¼ (literary:meaning of chisÅ of gochisÅ) é£è²éä¿¡ç¤¾ (Japanese)
  7. ^ a b c d Allison, A. (1991). "Japanese mothers and obentos: the lunch-box as ideological state apparatus". Anthropological Quarterly 64 (4): 195-208.
  8. ^ Traphagan, J.; Brown, L.K. (2002). "Fast food and intergenerational commensality in Japan: new styles and old patterns". Ethnology 41 (2): 119-134.
  9. ^ Kwintessential, Ltd. "Japan - Etiquette and Culture". http://www.kwintessential.co.uk/resources/global-etiquette/japan-country-profiles.html.

  * Japanese Western Wedding

Omori, A., (2008). Bridging the gap between chopstick usage and manners. The
Daily Yomiuri, 528. Retrieved on January 12, 2009, from the LexisNexis
Academic database.

## [edit] External links

  * Japanese Manners & Etiquette

v â¢ d â¢ e

Etiquette in Asia  
Sovereign  
states

Afghanistan Â· Armenia1 Â· Azerbaijan1 Â· Bahrain Â· Bangladesh Â· Bhutan Â·
Brunei Â· Burma2 Â· Cambodia Â· People's Republic of China Â· Cyprus1 Â· East
Timor3 Â· Egypt4 Â· Georgia4 Â· India Â· Indonesia Â· Iran Â· Iraq Â· Israel
Â· Japan Â· Jordan Â· Kazakhstan4 Â· North Korea Â· South Korea Â· Kuwait Â·
Kyrgyzstan Â· Laos Â· Lebanon Â· Malaysia Â· Maldives Â· Mongolia Â· Nepal Â·
Oman Â· Pakistan Â· Philippines Â· Qatar Â· Russia4 Â· Saudi Arabia Â·
Singapore Â· Sri Lanka Â· Syria Â· Tajikistan Â· Republic of China5 Â·
Thailand Â· Turkey4 Â· Turkmenistan Â· United Arab Emirates Â· Uzbekistan Â·
Vietnam Â· Yemen  
Dependencies,  
autonomies,  
other territories

Aceh Â· Adjara1 Â· Abkhazia1 Â· Akrotiri and Dhekelia Â· Altai Â· British
Indian Ocean Territory Â· Buryatia Â· Christmas Island Â· Cocos (Keeling)
Islands Â· Guangxi Â· Hong Kong Â· Inner Mongolia Â· Iraqi Kurdistan Â·
Jakarta Â· Khakassia Â· Macau Â· Nagorno-Karabakh Â· Nakhchivan Â· Ningxia Â·
Northern Cyprus Â· Palestine (Gaza Strip Â· West Bank) Â· Papua Â· Sakha Â·
South Ossetia1 Â· Tibet Â· Tuva Â· West Papua Â· Xinjiang Â· Yogyakarta  
Italics indicates an unrecognised or partially recognised country. 1 Sometimes
included in Europe, depending on the border definitions. 2 Officially known as
Myanmar. 3 Sometimes included in Oceania, and also known as Timor-Leste. 4
Transcontinental country. 5 Commonly known as Taiwan.  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Etiquette_in_Japan"

Categories: Etiquette | Japanese honorifics | Japanese culture

Hidden categories: Articles containing Japanese language text | All articles
with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April
2009 | Articles with links needing disambiguation | Articles needing
additional references from February 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * LatvieÅ¡u

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 20 April 2009, at 16:15 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



