
# Bi-directional text

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2008)  
Unicode  
Character encodings

  * Comparison
  * UTF-7, UTF-1
  * UTF-8, CESU-8
  * UTF-16/UCS-2
  * UTF-32/UCS-4
  * UTF-EBCDIC
  * SCSU, BOCU-1
  * Punycode (IDN)
  * GB 18030

  
UCS  
Mapping  
Bi-directional text  
BOM  
Han unification  
Unicode and HTML  
Unicode and E-mail  
Unicode typefaces  
Bi-directional text is used as some writing systems of the world, notably the
Arabic (including variants such as Nasta'liq), Persian and Hebrew scripts, are
written in a form known as right-to-left (RTL), in which writing begins at the
right-hand side of a page and concludes at the left-hand side. This is
different from the left-to-right (LTR) direction used by most languages in the
world. When LTR text is mixed with RTL in the same paragraph, each type of
text should be written in its own direction, which is known as bi-directional
text. This can get rather complex when multiple levels of quotation are used.

Many computer programs fail to display bi-directional text correctly. For
example, the Hebrew name Sarah (×©×¨×) should be spelled shin (×©) resh (×¨)
heh (×) from right to left. Some Web browsers may display the Hebrew text in
this article in the opposite direction.

## Contents

  * 1 Languages using bi-directional text
  * 2 Unicode support
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Languages using bi-directional text

There are very few scripts that can be written in either direction.

Such was the case with Egyptian hieroglyphics, where the signs had a distinct
"head" that faced the beginning of a line and "tail" that faced the end.

Chinese characters can also be written in either direction, especially in
signs (but the orientation of the individual characters is never changed).
This can often be seen on tour buses in China, where the company name
customarily runs from the front of the vehicle to its rear - that is, from
right to left on the right side of the bus, and from left to right on the left
side of the bus.

<IMG>

The right side (text runs from right to left)

<IMG>

The left side (text runs from left to right)  
Another variety of writing style, called boustrophedon, was used in some
ancient Greek inscriptions, Tuareg, and Hungarian runes. This method of
writing alternates direction, and usually reverses the individual characters,
on each successive line.

## [edit] Unicode support

Bidirectional script support is the capability of a computer system to
correctly display bi-directional text. The term is often shortened to the
jargon term BiDi or bidi.

Early computer installations were designed only to support a single writing
system, typically for left-to-right scripts based on the Latin alphabet only.
Adding new character sets and character encodings enabled a number of other
left-to-right scripts to be supported, but did not easily support right-to-
left scripts such as Arabic or Hebrew, and mixing the two was not practical.
It is possible to simply flip the left-to-right display order to a right-to-
left display order, but doing this sacrifices the ability to correctly display
left-to-right scripts. With bidirectional script support, it is possible to
mix scripts from different scripts on the same page, regardless of writing
direction.

In particular, the Unicode standard provides foundations for complete BiDi
support, with detailed rules as to how mixtures of left-to-right and right-to-
left scripts are to be encoded and displayed.

In Unicode encoding, all non-punctuation characters are stored in writing
order. This means that the writing direction of characters is stored within
the characters. If this is the case, the character is called "strong".
Punctuation characters however, can appear in both LTR and RTL languages. They
are called "weak" characters because they do not contain any directional
information. So it is up to the software to decide in which direction these
"weak" characters will be placed. Sometimes (in mixed-directions text) this
leads to display errors, caused by the bidi-algorithm that runs through the
text and identifies LTR and RTL strong characters and assigns a direction to
weak characters, according to the algorithm's rules.

In the algorithm, each sequence of concatenated strong characters is called a
"run". A weak character that is located between two strong characters with the
same orientation will inherit their orientation. A weak character that is
located between two strong characters with a different writing direction, will
inherit the main context's writing direction (in an LTR document the character
will become LTR, in an RTL document, it will become RTL). If a "weak"
character is followed by another "weak" character, the algorithm will look at
the first neighbouring "strong" character. Sometimes this leads to
unintentional display errors. To correct or prevent these errors, you can use
"pseudo-strong" characters. These Unicode control characters are called
"marks". The mark (U+200E LTR or U+200F RTL) is to be inserted into a location
to make an enclosed weak character inherit its writing direction.

For example, to have the trademark symbol â¢ (TM; U+2122) for an English name
brand (LTR) in an Arabic (RTL) passage display correctly, you need to add an
LTR mark after the trademark symbol if the symbol is not followed by LTR text.
This is because if you do not add the LTR mark, the weak character â¢ will be
neighboured by a strong LTR character and a strong RTL character. Hence, in an
RTL context, it will be considered to be RTL, and displayed in an incorrect
order.

  

## [edit] See also

  * Internationalization and localization
  * Horizontal and vertical writing in East Asian scripts
  * Writing system (section on directionality)

## [edit] References

  

## [edit] External links

  * Unicode Standards Annex #9 The Bidirectional Algorithm
  * W3C guidelines on authoring techniques for bi-directional text \- includes examples and good explanations
  * GNU FriBidi A free implementation of the Unicode bidirectional algorithm
  * ICU International Components for Unicode contains an implementation of the bidirectional algorithm â along with other internationalization services
  * UCData: "Pretty Good Bidi Algorithm Library" A small and fast bidirectional reordering algorithm that works pretty good, but not necessarily compliant to the Unicode algorithm
  * Bidirectional Scripts in Desktop Software Working group for supporting BiDi in Free Software. Contains several links to readings and implementation regarding BiDi in computer systems.
  * Another Wiki about BiDi
  * Bidirectional text - Examples and practical advice
  * .Net BiDi Implementation

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bi-directional_text"

Categories: Character encoding | Unicode algorithms | Unicode

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from September 2008 | All articles
lacking sources

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 14 February 2009, at 19:47.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



