
# Speech balloon

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

The three most common speech balloons (top to bottom: speech, thought,
scream).

Speech balloons (also speech bubbles, dialogue balloons, or word balloons) are
a graphic convention used most commonly in comic books, strips, and cartoons
to allow words (and much less often, pictures) to be understood as
representing the speech or thoughts of a given character in the comic. There
is often a formal distinction between the balloon that indicates thoughts and
the one that indicates words spoken aloud: the bubble that conveys subjective
thoughts is often referred to as a thought balloon.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Popular forms
    * 2.1 Speech bubbles
    * 2.2 Thought bubbles
    * 2.3 Other forms
  * 3 Captions
  * 4 Artist-specific variations
  * 5 Graphic symbols in speech bubbles
    * 5.1 Punctuation marks
    * 5.2 Foreign languages
    * 5.3 The big Z
    * 5.4 Drawings within the speech bubble
  * 6 Order
  * 7 Lettering
  * 8 Substance of balloons
  * 9 Computer-generated speech balloons
  * 10 References
  * 11 See also
  * 12 External links

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Prior to the 18th century, speech was depicted using bands, flags, scrolls, or
sheets of paper.[1]

<IMG>

<IMG>

1775 cartoon printed in Boston

One of the earliest antecedents to the modern speech bubble were the âspeech
scrollsâ, wispy lines that connected first person speech to the mouths of
the speakers in Mesoamerican art.[2]

In Western graphic art, labels that reveal what a pictured figure is saying
have appeared since at least the 13th century. Word balloons began appearing
in 18th century printed broadsides and political cartoons from the American
Revolution often used them. [1][2] With the development of the comics industry
in the 20th century, the appearance of speech balloons has become increasingly
standardized, though the formal conventions that have evolved in different
cultures (USA as opposed to Japan, for example), can be quite distinct.

The Yellow Kid is generally credited as the first true comic strip character.
His words initially appeared on his yellow shirt but word balloons very much
like those in use today were added almost immediately, as early as 1896. By
the start of the 20th century the use of word balloons was ubiquitous, and
since that time only a very few comic strips and comic books have relied on
captions, notably Hal Foster's Prince Valiant and the early Tarzan comic
strip. For many years, word balloons were less common in Europe than in the
USA, or were used together with captions. One example is the Dutch cartoonist
Marten Toonder's comics about Tom Puss and Oliver B. Bumble, where the
literary captions are printed out below the strip and almost take up as much
space as the drawings, so that the strip fills twice the space of most
newspaper strips. A similar example from England is Rupert the Bear.

## [edit] Popular forms

### [edit] Speech bubbles

The most common is the speech bubble. It comes in two forms for two
circumstances: An in-panel character and an off-panel character. An in-panel
character (one who is fully or mostly visible in the panel of the strip of
comic that the reader is viewing) uses a bubble with a pointer, called a tail,
directed towards the speaker.

When one character has multiple balloons within a panel, often only the
balloon nearest to the speaker's head has a tail, and the others are connected
to it in sequence by narrow bands. This style is often used in Mad Magazine,
due to its often dialogue-based humor.

An off-panel character (the comic book equivalent of being "off screen") has
several options, some of them rather unconventional. The first is a standard
speech bubble with a tail pointing toward the speaker's position. The second
option, which originated in manga, has the tail pointing into the bubble,
instead of out. (This tail is still pointing towards the speaker.) The third
option replaces the tail with a sort of bottleneck that connects with the side
of the panel. It can be seen in the works of graphic novelist Marjane Satrapi
(author of Persepolis).

In American comics, a bubble without a tail means that the speaker is not
merely outside the reader's field of view but invisible to the viewpoint
character, often as an unspecified member of a crowd.

Characters distant (in space or time) from the scene of the panel can still
speak, in squared bubbles without a tail; this usage, equivalent to voice-over
in film, is not uncommon in American comics for dramatic contrast. In contrast
to captions, the corners of such balloons never coincide with those of the
panel; for further distinction they often have a double outline, a different
background color, or quotation marks.

### [edit] Thought bubbles

Thought bubbles come in two forms: the chain thought bubble and the "fuzzy"
bubble.

The chain thought bubble is the almost universal symbol for thinking in
cartoons. It consists of a large, cloud-like bubble containing the text of the
thought, which is connected to the area next to a character by a chain of
increasingly smaller circular bubbles.

Often animal characters like Snoopy and Garfield "talk" using thought bubbles.

In Manga, the method of depicting thought is different. Instead of a cloud,
the thought is encircled in a shiny halo.

Another, less conventional thought bubble has emerged: the "fuzzy" thought
bubble. Used in manga (by such artists as Ken Akamatsu), the fuzzy bubble is
roughly circular in shape (generally), but the edge of the bubble is not a
line but a collection of spikes close to each other, creating the impression
of fuzziness. Fuzzy thought bubbles do not use tails, and are placed in the
area of the character who is thinking. This has the advantage of reflecting
the TV equivalent effect: something said with an echo.

Writers and artists can refuse to use thought bubbles, expressing the action
through spoken dialogue and drawing; they are sometimes seen as an inefficient
method of expressing thought because they are attached directly to the head of
the thinker, unlike methods such as caption boxes, which can be used both as
an expression of thought and narration while existing in an entirely different
panel from the character thinking. However, they are restricted to the current
viewpoint character. An example is Alan Moore and David Lloyd's V for
Vendetta, wherein during one chapter, a monologue expressed in captions serves
not only to express the thoughts of a character but also the mood, status and
actions of three others.

In modern British and American adventure comics, the thought balloon is often
replaced by an inner monologue in captions, as described above.

### [edit] Other forms

The shape of a speech balloon can be used to convey further information.
Common ones include the following:

  * Scream bubbles indicate a character is screaming or shouting, usually with a jagged outline or a thicker line which can be colored. Their lettering is usually larger or bolder than normal.
  * Broadcast bubbles (also known as radio bubbles) may have a jagged tail like the conventional drawing of a lightning flash and either a squared-off or jagged outline. Letters are sometimes italicised without also being bold. Broadcast bubbles indicate that the speaker is communicating through an electronic device, such as a radio or television, or is robotic.
  * Whisper bubbles are usually portrayed with a dashed (dotted) outline, smaller font or gray lettering, which indicates the tone is softer as most speech is printed in black. They indicate that the speaker is whispering.
  * Icicle bubbles have jagged "icicles" on the lower edge, representing "cold" hostility. Similarly the speech balloons of monsters may have an outline that suggests dripping blood or slime.
  * Colored bubbles convey the emotion that goes with the speech, such as red for anger or green for envy. This style is not used very often in modern comics.

## [edit] Captions

Captions are generally used for narration purposes. They are generally square
and connected to the edge of the panel. Often they are also colored to
indicate the difference between them and the bubbles used by the characters,
which are almost always white.

## [edit] Artist-specific variations

<IMG>

<IMG>

Yellow Kid's words appear on his shirt

Some characters and strips use highly unconventional methods of communication.
Perhaps the most notable is the Yellow Kid, an early American comic strip. His
(but not the other characters') words would appear on his large, smock-like
shirt.

Also noteworthy are the many variations on the form created by Dave Sim for
his comic Cerebus the Aardvark. Depending on the shape, size, and position of
the bubble, as well as the texture and shape of the letters within it, Sim
could convey large amounts of information about the speaker. This included
separate bubbles for different states of mind (drunkenness, etc), for echoes,
and a special class of bubbles for one single floating apparition.

An early pioneer in experimenting with many different types of speech balloons
and lettering for different types of speech was Walt Kelly, in his Pogo strip.
Deacon Mushrat speaks in blackletter; P.T. Bridgeport speaks in circus
posters; Sarcophagus MacAbre speaks in condolence cards.

In the famous French comic series Asterix, Goscinny and Uderzo use bubbles
without tails to indicate a distant or unseen speaker. They also have had fun
experimenting with many different types of lettering to suit characters with
distinct nationalities, thus meaning they speak a different language that
Asterix may not understand, but the readers can. So Goths speak in
blackletter, Greeks in angular lettering (though always understood by the
Gaulish main characters, so it's more of an accent than a language), Norse
with "NÃ¸rdic Ã¥ccents", Egyptians in faux hieroglyphs (depictive
illustrations and rebuses) etc. Another original experiment with speech
bubbles was exclusive to one album, Asterix and the Roman Agent. The agent in
question was a vile manipulator who could create dissension amongst any group
of people with a single innocent-sounding comment. His victims start
quarreling and ultimately fighting each other while speaking in green-colored
speech bubbles, which symbolize darnel.[citation needed]

Font variation is a common tactic in comics. The Sandman series, written by
Neil Gaiman, features many characters whose speech bubbles are written with a
font that is exclusive to them. Some examples: the main character, the gloomy
Dream speaks in wavy-edged bubbles, completely black, with similarly wavy
white lettering. His sister, the scatterbrained and whimsical Delirium speaks
in bubbles in a many-colored explosive background with uneven lettering, and
the irreverent raven Matthew speaks in a shaky angular kind of bubble with
scratchy lettering. Other characters, such as John Dee, have special shapes of
bubbles for their own.

In MAD Magazine, in the recurring "Monroe" comic strip, certain words are
written larger or in unusual fonts for emphasis.

In manga, there is a tendency to include the speech necessary for the
storyline in balloons, while small scribbles outside the balloons add side
comments, often used for irony or to show that they're said in a much smaller
voice. Satsuki Yotsuba in the manga series Negima is notable because she
speaks almost entirely in side scribble.

## [edit] Graphic symbols in speech bubbles

Speech bubbles are used not only to include a character's words, but also
emotions, voice inflections and unspecified language.

### [edit] Punctuation marks

One of the universal emblems of the art of comics is the use of a single
punctuation mark to depict a character's emotions, much more efficiently than
any possible sentence. A speech bubble with a single big question mark (?)
(often drawn by hand, not counted as part of the lettering) denotes confusion
or ignorance. An exclamation mark (!) indicates surprise or terror. This
device is broadly used in the European comic tradition, the Belgian artist
HergÃ©'s The Adventures of Tintin series being a good example. In other
countries, the punctuation marks stand alone above the character's head, with
no bubble needed.

In manga, the ellipsis (i.e. three dots) is also used to express silence in a
much more significant way than the mere absence of bubbles. This is specially
seen when a character is supposed to say something, to indicate a stunned
silence or when a sarcastic comment is expected by the reader. The ellipsis,
along with the big drop of sweat on the character's templeâusually depicting
shame, confusion, or embarrassment caused by other people's actionsâ is one
of the Japanese graphic symbols that have taken root in comics all around the
world, although they are still rare in Western tradition. Japanese even has a
sound effect for "deafening silence," shiin (ã·ã¼ã³ ?).

### [edit] Foreign languages

In many comic books, words that would be foreign to the narration but are
displayed in translation for the reader are surrounded by angle brackets or
chevrons ( <Like this> ), e.g. in the ElfQuest series whenever any character
speaks Human.[citation needed]

Gilbert Hernandez' series about Palomar is written in English, but supposed to
take place mainly in a Hispanic country. Thus, what's supposed to be
representations of Spanish speech is written without brackets, but occasional
actual English speech is written within brackets, to indicate that it is
unintelligible to the main Hispanophone characters in the series.

Other comic books use a different font or balloon style to the same end. In
AstÃ©rix, Goths speak in blackletter; Scandinavians substitute Ã¥ for a and Ã¸
for o. (This device is not consistently applied: Greeks speak in angular
letters, but this is apparently meant only to suggest an accent, as the Romans
and Gauls readily understand them.)

Some comics will have the actual foreign language in the speech balloon, with
the translation as a footnote. It's much used in Asterix with Romans citing
Latin sayings.

### [edit] The big Z

It is a convention in American comics that the sound of a snore can be reduced
to a single letter Z. Thus a speech bubble with this letter standing all alone
(again, drawn by hand rather than a font type) means the character is sleeping
in most humorous comics. This can be seen, for instance, in Charles Schulz's
Peanuts comic strips.

Being such a long-established device, the Z-bubble doesn't even imply that the
character is snoring anymore, but just sleeping. Jim Davis has based some
jokes starring Garfield upon this technique. For example, in one strip,
Garfield is unable to sleep because his Z-bubble is pointing in the wrong
direction. When he grabs the bubble's tail to make it point at himself, he
falls asleep.

Originally, the resemblance between the 'z' sound and that of a snore seemed
exclusive to the English language, but the spread of American comics has made
it a frequent feature in other countries.

In manga, though, the usual symbol for sleep is a big bubble coming out of the
character's nose.

### [edit] Drawings within the speech bubble

Singing characters usually have musical notes drawn into their word balloons.
Archie Comics' Melody Valentine, a character in their Josie and the Pussycats
comic, has musical notes drawn into her word balloons at all times, to convey
that she speaks in a sing-song voice.

The above mentioned Albert Uderzo in the Asterix series decorates speech
bubbles with beautiful flowers depicting an extremely soft, sweet voice
(usually preceding a violent outburst by the same character).

A stormy cloud with a rough lightning sticking out of it, either in a bubble
or just floating above the character's head as a modified 'cloudy' thought
bubble, depicts anger, not always verbally expressed.

Light bulbs are sometimes used when the character comes up with an idea or
solution to a problem.

In the Western world, it is common to replace profanity with a string of
nonsense symbols (&%$@*$#), sometimes called grawlixes. In comics that are
usually addressed to children or teenagers, bad language is censored by
replacing it with more or less elaborate drawings and expressionistic symbols.
For example, instead of calling someone a swine, a pig is drawn in the speech
bubble.

One example is the Spanish Mortadelo series, created by Francisco IbÃ¡Ã±ez.
Although not specifically addressed to children, Mortadelo was born during
Francisco Franco's dictatorship, when censorship was the order of the day and
the slightest attempt of rough language was prohibited. When IbÃ¡Ã±ez's
characters are angry, donkey heads, lightning, lavatories, billy goats and
even faux Japanese characters are often seen in their bubbles.

When Mortadelo was portrayed on film by Spanish director Javier Fesser in
2003, one of the critiques made to his otherwise successful adaptation was the
character's use of words that never appeared in the comics. Fesser claimed:
"When you see a bubble speech containing a lightning falling on a pig, what do
you imagine the character's saying?"

## [edit] Order

In order for comic strip and graphic novel dialogue to make sense, it has to
be read in order. Thus, conventions have evolved in the order in which the
communication bubbles are read. The individual bubbles are read in the order
of the language. For example, in English, the bubbles are read from left to
right in a panel, while in Japanese, it is the other way around. Sometimes the
bubbles are "stacked", with two characters having multiple bubbles, one above
the other. Such stacks are read from the top down. Poor use of speech balloons
can unintentionally make the proper reading order ambiguous, confusing the
reader.

## [edit] Lettering

Traditionally, a cartoonist or occupational letterer would draw in all the
individual letters in the balloons and sound effects by hand. A modern
alternative, used by most comics today and universal in English-translated
manga, is to letter with computer programs. The fonts used usually emulate the
style of hand-lettering.

Traditionally, most mainstream comic books are lettered entirely in upper-
case, with a few exceptions:

  * Name particles such as de and von, and the "c" in a surname of Scottish or Irish origin starting with Mc
  * To indicate a frightened or quiet manner of speech
  * An interjection such as "er", "um", etc.

In a few comics, uppercase and lowercase are used as in ordinary writing.
Since the mid-1980s, mixed case lettering has gradually become more widely
used in mainstream books.

Recently, Marvel Comics experimented with mixed case lettering in all its
books. Most mainstream titles have since returned to traditional all upper-
case lettering but titles specifically marketed to younger readers or a more
manga audience such as the Marvel Adventures line, Runaways and Spider-Man
Loves Mary Jane have retained mixed case lettering.

In many comics, although the lettering is entirely in capital letters, serif
versions of "I" are used exclusively where a capital I would appear in normal
print text, and a sanserif (i.e., a simple vertical line) is used in all other
places. This reduces confusion with the number one, and also serves to
indicate when the personal pronoun "I" is meant. This lettering convention can
be seen in computer fonts such as Blambot's "DigitalStrip.ttf" and
"AnimeAce.ttf" fonts, which make no other distinction between lower- and
uppercase letters.

## [edit] Substance of balloons

In several occasions, comics artists have used balloons (or similar narrative
devices) as if they have true substance, usually for humorous purposes. In
Peanuts, for example, the notes played by Schroeder occasionally take
substance and are used in various ways, including Christmas decorations or
standing places for birds. Sometimes balloons can be influenced by the strip's
environment: in the Italian strip Sturmtruppen they freeze and crack when the
temperature is very low, or an Archie comic strip where two men from Alaska
remarked on how cold it was, by saying the speech balloons froze as they said
them, and the words had to be thawed out to be heard.

In the novel Who Censored Roger Rabbit?, the last words of a murdered Toon
(cartoon character) are found under his body in the form of a speech balloon.

## [edit] Computer-generated speech balloons

Many digital artists generate speech balloons with general-purpose
illustration software. Products like Comic Book Creator for Microsoft Windows,
Comic Life for Mac OS X and Windows, and the cross-platform application
Balloonist target the non-professional end of the market.

TXTual Healing is a street art performance that involves strategically
projecting interactive speech bubbles onto the facade of a building, as if
they are coming out of the doors and windows. Using a computer paired with a
cell phone, people in the street can generate their own content for the
bubbles by sending in an SMS message.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Evolution of speech balloons. Retrieved on August 24, 2006.
  2. ^ Hull, Kerry Michael (2003). Verbal Art and Performance in Châortiâ and Maya Hieroglyphic Writing. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/etd/d/2003/hullkm039/hullkm039.pdf.

## [edit] See also

  * Balloon help
  * The Bubble Project
  * Tag Cloud
  * Speech scroll

## [edit] External links

  * Picture of a Mayan painted pot A depiction of speech scrolls.
  * Tutorial for Creating Speech Bubbles for Comics and Cartoons
  * Your Webcomic Can Still Be Saved A guide on drawing speech bubbles and avoiding common mistakes in webcomics.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speech_balloon"

Categories: Comics terminology

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since October 2008 | Articles containing Japanese
language text | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaelg
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Walon

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 March 2009, at 18:07.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



