
# Autonomous building

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

An autonomous building is a building designed to be operated independently
from infrastructural support services such as the electric power grid,
municipal water systems, sewage treatment systems, storm drains, communication
services, and in some cases, public roads.

Advocates of autonomous building describe advantages that include reduced
environmental impacts, increased security, and lower costs of ownership. Some
cited advantages satisfy tenets of green building, not independence per se
(see below). Off-grid buildings often rely very little on civil services and
are therefore safer and more comfortable during civil disaster or military
attacks. (Off-grid buildings would not lose power or water if public supplies
were compromised for some reason.)

Most of the research and published articles concerning autonomous building
focus on residential homes.

British architects Brenda and Robert Vale have said that, as of 2002, "It is
quite possible in all parts of Australia to construct a 'house with no bills',
which would be comfortable without heating and cooling, which would make its
own electricity, collect its own water and deal with its own waste...These
houses can be built now, using off-the-shelf techniques. It is possible to
build a "house with no bills" for the same price as a conventional house, but
it would be (25%) smaller."[1]

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Advantages
  * 3 Disadvantages
  * 4 Systems
    * 4.1 Water
    * 4.2 Sewage
      * 4.2.1 Resource
      * 4.2.2 Waste
    * 4.3 Storm drains
    * 4.4 Electricity
    * 4.5 Heating
    * 4.6 Water heating
    * 4.7 Cooling
    * 4.8 Food production
    * 4.9 Communication
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dymaxion_house, reconstructed and installed in the Henry Ford Museum.

In the 1930s through the 1950s, Buckminster Fuller's three prototype Dymaxion
houses adopted many techniques to reduce resource use, such as a "fogger"
shower head to reduce water use, a packaging toilet, and a vacuum turbine for
electric power. While not designed as autonomous per se, Fuller's concern with
sustainable and efficient design is congruent with the goal of autonomy, and
showed that it was theoretically possible. One of the three prototype Dymaxion
houses that Fuller produced was made part of the conventional Graham family
residence in Wichita, Kansas, and has now been reconstructed at the Henry Ford
Museum.

In the 1970s, a group of activists and engineers calling themselves the New
Alchemists believed the warnings of imminent resource depletion and
starvation. The New Alchemists were famous for the depth of research effort
placed in their projects. Using conventional construction techniques, they
designed a series of "bioshelter" projects, the most famous of which was the
Ark Bioshelter community for Prince Edward Island. They published the plans
for all of these, with detailed design calculations and blueprints. The Ark
used wind based water pumping and electricity, and was self-contained in food
production. It had living quarters for people, fish tanks raising Tilapia for
protein, a greenhouse watered with fish water and a closed loop sewage
reclamation system that recycled human waste into sanitized fertilizer for the
fish tanks. As of 2007, the successor organization to the New Alchemists still
had a web page up as the "New Alchemy Institute".[2] The PEI Ark has been
abandoned and partially renovated several times.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The bathroom of an Earthship, featuring a recycled bottle wall.

The 1990s saw the development of Earthships, similar in intent to the Ark
project, but organized as a for-profit venture, with construction details
published in a series of 3 books by Mike Reynolds. The building material is
tires filled with earth. This makes a wall that has large amounts of thermal
mass (see earth sheltering). Berms are placed on exposed surfaces to further
increase the house's temperature stability. The water system starts with rain
water, processed for drinking, then washing, then plant watering, then toilet
flushing, and finally black water is recycled again for more plant watering.
The cisterns are placed and used as thermal masses. Power, including
electricity, heat and water heating, is from solar power.

1990s architects such as William McDonough and Ken Yeang applied
environmentally responsible building design to large commercial buildings,
such as office buildings, making them largely self-sufficient in energy
production. One major bank building (ING's Amsterdam headquarters) in the
Netherlands was constructed to be autonomous and artistic as well.

## [edit] Advantages

As an architect or engineer becomes more concerned with the disadvantages of
transportation networks, and dependence on distant resources, their designs
tend to include more autonomous elements. The historic path to autonomy was a
concern for secure sources of heat, power, water and food. A nearly parallel
path toward autonomy has been to start with a concern for environmental
impacts, which cause disadvantages.

Autonomous buildings can increase security and reduce environmental impacts by
using on-site resources (such as sunlight and rain) that would otherwise be
wasted. Autonomy often dramatically reduces the costs and impacts of networks
that serve the building, because autonomy short-circuits the multiplying
inefficiencies of collecting and transporting resources. Other impacted
resources, such as oil reserves and the retention of the local watershed, can
often be cheaply conserved by thoughtful designs.

Autonomous buildings are usually energy-efficient in operation, and therefore
cost-efficient, for the obvious reason that smaller energy needs are easier to
satisfy off-grid. But they may substitute energy production or other
techniques to avoid diminishing returns in extreme conservation.

An autonomous structure is not always environmentally friendly. The goal of
independence from support systems is associated with, but not identical to,
other goals of environmentally responsible green building. However, autonomous
buildings also usually include some degree of sustainability through the use
of renewable energy and other renewable resources, producing no more
greenhouse gases than they consume, and other measures.

## [edit] Disadvantages

First and fundamentally, independence is a matter of degree. Complete
independence is very hard or impossible to attain. For example, eliminating
dependence on the electrical grid is one thing but growing all of your own
food is a more demanding and time-consuming proposition.

Living in an autonomous shelter can require one to make sacrifices in one's
lifestyle choices, personal behavior, and social expectations. Even the most
comfortable and technologically advanced autonomous houses may require some
differences in behavior. Some people adjust easily. Others describe the
experience as inconvenient, irritating, isolating, or even as an unwanted
full-time job. A well-designed building can reduce this issue, but usually at
the expense of reduced autonomy.

An autonomous house must be custom-built (or extensively retrofitted) to suit
the climate and location. Passive solar techniques, alternative toilet and
sewage systems, thermal massing designs, basement battery systems, efficient
windowing, and the array of other design tactics require some degree of non-
standard construction, added expense, ongoing experimentation and maintenance,
and also have an effect on the psychology of the space.

The Vales, among others, have shown that living off-grid can be a practical,
logical lifestyle choiceâunder certain conditions.

## [edit] Systems

This section includes some minimal descriptions of methods, to give some feel
for such a building's practicality, provide indexes to further information,
and give a sense of modern trends.

### [edit] Water

<IMG>

<IMG>

A domestic rainwater harvesting system

There are many methods of collecting and conserving water. Use reduction is
cost-effective.

Greywater systems reuse drained wash water to flush toilets or to water lawns
and gardens. Greywater systems can halve the water use of most residential
buildings; however, they require the purchase of a sump, greywater
pressurization pump and secondary plumbing. Some builders are installing
waterless urinals and even composting toilets that completely eliminate water
usage in sewage disposal.

The classic solution with minimal life-style changes is using a well. Once
drilled, a well-foot requires substantial power. However, advanced well-foots
can reduce power usage by twofold or more from older models. Well water can be
contaminated in some areas. The sono arsenic filter eliminates unhealthy
arsenic in well water. However drilling a well is an uncertain activity, with
aquifers depleted in some areas. It can also be expensive.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A concrete under-floor cistern being installed.

In regions with sufficient rainfall, it is often more economical to design a
building to use rain, with supplementary water deliveries in a drought. Rain
water makes excellent soft washwater, but needs antibacterial treatment. If
used for drinking, mineral supplements or mineralization is necessary.[3]

Most desert and temperate climates get at least 250 mm (10 in) of rain per
year. This means that a typical one-story house with a greywater system can
supply its year-round water needs from its roof alone. In the driest areas, it
might require a cistern of 30 mÂ³ (8400 U.S. gallons). Many areas average 13
mm (0.5 in) of rain per week, and these can use a cistern as small as 10 mÂ³.

In many areas, it is difficult to keep a roof clean enough for drinking [4].
To reduce dirt and bad tastes, systems use a metal collecting-roof and a "roof
cleaner" tank that diverts the first 40 liters. Cistern water is usually
chlorinated, though reverse osmosis systems provide even better quality
drinking water.

Modern cisterns are usually large plastic tanks. Gravity tanks on short towers
are reliable, so pump repairs are less urgent. The least expensive bulk
cistern is a fenced pond or pool at ground level.

Reducing autonomy reduces the size and expense of cisterns. Many autonomous
homes can reduce water use below ten gallons per person per day, so that in a
drought a month of water can be delivered inexpensively via truck. Self-
delivery is often possible by installing fabric water tanks that fit the bed
of a pick-up truck.

It can be convenient to use the cistern as a heat sink or trap for a heat pump
or air conditioning system; however this can make cold drinking water warm,
and in drier years may decrease the efficiency of the HVAC system.

Bottled water for drinking harms autonomy, but is often inexpensive, taste-
tested, premineralized, with controlled mineral and bacterial counts. It can
dramatically improve the health and lifestyle of a home with autonomous water
sources.

Solar stills can efficiently produce drinking water from ditch water or
cistern water, especially high-efficiency multiple effect humidification
designs, which separate the evaporator(s) and condenser(s).

New technologies, like reverse osmosis, and aquosus, can create unlimited
amounts of pure water from polluted water, ocean water, and even from humid
air. Water makers are available for yachts that convert seawater and
electricity into potable water and brine. Atmospheric water generators extract
moisture from dry desert air and filter it to pure water.

### [edit] Sewage

#### [edit] Resource

<IMG>

<IMG>

A clivus Multrum composting toilet

The approaches above treat human excrement as a waste rather than a resource.
Humanure is composted human excrement, and can return nutrients to a garden.
Recycling human excrement requires minimal life-style changes.

In the case of composting toilets, units of varying size can be used to
naturally decompose human feces into a highly useful odourless and safe
compost. Without further research most health authorities forbid use of
"humanure" for growing food directly in the compost (see Humanure by Joseph
Jenkins). The risk is microbial and viral contamination.

State of the art home sewage treatment systems use biological treatment,
usually beds of plants and aquaria, that eliminate nutrients and bacteria and
convert greywater and sewage to clear water. This odor- and color-free
reclaimed water can be used to flush toilets and water outside plants. When
tested, it approaches standards for potable water. In climates that freeze,
the plants and aquaria need to be kept in a small greenhouse space. Good
systems need about as much care as a large aquarium.

Electric incinerating toilets turn excrement into a small amount of ash. They
are cool to the touch, have no water and no pipes, and require an air vent in
a wall. They are used in remote areas where access to septic tank resources
are limited.

NASA's bioreactor is an extremely advanced biological sewage system. It can
turn sewage into air and water through microbial action. NASA plans to use it
in the manned Mars mission.

A big disadvantage of biological sewage treatment systems is that if the house
is empty, the sewage system biota starve to death.

Another method is NASA's urine-to-water distillation system.

#### [edit] Waste

Sewage handling is not attractive, but it is essential for public health. Many
diseases are transmitted by poorly functioning sewage systems.

The standard system is a tiled leach field combined with a septic tank. The
basic idea is to provide a small system with primary sewage treatment. Sludge
settles to the bottom of the septic tank, is partially reduced by anaerobic
digestion, and fluid is dispersed in the leach field. The leach field is
usually under a yard growing grass. Septic tanks can operate entirely by
gravity, and if well managed, are reasonably safe.

Septic tanks have to be pumped periodically by a honey wagon to eliminate non
reducing solids. Failure to pump a septic tank can cause overflow that damages
the leach field, and contaminates ground water. Septic tanks may also require
some lifestyle changes, such as not using garbage disposals, minimizing fluids
flushed into the tank, and minimizing nondigestible solids flushed into the
tank. For example, septic safe toilet paper is recommended.

However, septic tanks remain popular because they permit standard plumbing
fixtures, and require few or no lifestyle sacrifices.

Composting or packaging toilets make it economical and sanitary to throw away
sewage as part of the normal garbage collection service. They also reduce
water use by half, and eliminate the difficulty and expense of septic tanks.
However, they require the local landfill to use sanitary practices.

Incinerator systems are quite practical. The ashes are biologically safe, and
less than 1/10 the volume of the original waste, but like all incinerator
waste, are usually classified as hazardous waste.

Some of the oldest pre-system sewage types are pit toilets, latrines, and
outhouses. These are still used in many developing countries.

### [edit] Storm drains

Drainage systems are a crucial compromise between human habitability and a
secure, sustainable watershed. Paved areas and lawns or turf do not allow much
precipitation to filter through the ground to recharge aquifers. They can
cause flooding and damage in neighbourhoods, as the water flows over the
surface towards a low point.

Typically, elaborate, capital-intensive storm sewer networks are engineered to
deal with stormwater. In some cities, such as the Victorian era London sewers
or much of the old City of Toronto, the storm water system is combined with
the sanitary sewer system. In the event of heavy precipitation, the load on
the sewage treatment plant at the end of the pipe becomes too great to handle
and raw sewage is dumped into holding tanks, and sometimes into surface water.

Autonomous buildings can address precipitation in a number of ways:

If a water absorbing swale for each yard is combined with permeable concrete
streets, storm drains can be omitted from the neighbourhood. This can save
more than $800 per house (1970s) by eliminating storm drains.[5] One way to
use the savings is to purchase larger lots, which permits more amenities at
the same cost. Permeable concrete is an established product in warm climates,
and in development for freezing climates. In freezing climates, the
elimination of storm drains can often still pay for enough land to construct
swales (shallow water collecting ditches) or water impeding berms instead.
This plan provides more land for homeowners and can offer more interesting
topography for landscaping.

A green roof captures precipitation and uses the water to grow plants. It can
be built into a new building or used to replace an existing roof.

### [edit] Electricity

Further information: Microgeneration

Further information: Zero emissions

<IMG>

<IMG>

Parts of DIY Wind turbine

<IMG>

<IMG>

A PV-solar system

Since electricity is an expensive utility, the first step towards conservation
is to design a house and lifestyle to reduce demand. Fluorescent lights,
laptop computers and gas-powered refrigerators save electricity, although gas-
powered refrigerators are not very efficient.[6] There are also superefficient
electric refrigerators, such as those produced by the Sun Frost company, some
of which use only about half as much electricity as a mass-market energy star-
rated refrigerator.

Using a solar roof, solar cells can provide electric power. Solar roofs have
the potential to be more cost-effective than retrofitted solar power, because
buildings need roofs anyway. Modern solar cells last about 40 years, which
makes them a reasonable investment in some areas. Solar cells have only small
life-style impacts: The cells must be cleaned a few times per year.

A number of areas that lack sun have wind. To generate power, the average
autonomous house needs only one small wind generator, 5 m or less in diameter.
On a 30 m high tower, this turbine can provide enough power to supplement
solar power on cloudy days. Commercially available wind turbines use sealed,
one-moving-part AC generators and passive, self-feathering blades for years of
operation without service.

The largest advantage of wind power is that larger wind turbines have a lower
per-watt cost than solar cells, provided there is wind. However, location is
critical. Just as some locations lack sun for solar cells, some locations lack
sufficient wind for an economical turbine installation. In the Great Plains of
the United States a 10 m turbine can supply enough energy to heat and cool a
well-built all-electric house. Economic use in other areas requires research,
and possibly a site-survey. [7]

During times of low demand, excess power can be stored in batteries for future
use. However, batteries need to be replaced every few years. In many areas,
battery expenses can be eliminated by attaching the building to the electric
power grid and operating the power system with net metering. Utility
permission is required, but such cooperative generation is legally mandated in
some areas (e.g. California).[8]

A grid-based building is less autonomous, but more economical and sustainable
with fewer lifestyle sacrifices. In rural areas the grid's cost and impacts
can be reduced by using single wire earth return systems (eg the MALT-system).

In areas that lack access to the grid, battery size can be reduced by
including a generator to recharge the batteries during extended fogs or other
low-power conditions. Auxiliary generators are usually run from propane,
natural gas, or sometimes diesel. An hour of charging usually provides a day
of operation. Modern residential chargers permit the user to set the charging
times, so the generator is quiet at night. Some generators automatically test
themselves once per week.[9][10]

Recent advances in passively stable magnetic bearings may someday permit
inexpensive storage of power in a flywheel in a vacuum. Well-funded groups
like Canada's Ballard Power Systems are also working to develop a
"regenerative fuel cell," a device that can generate hydrogen and oxygen when
power is available, and combine these efficiently when power is needed.

Earth batteries tap electric currents in the earth called telluric current.
They can be installed anywhere in the ground. They provide only low voltages
and current. They were used to power telegraphs in the 19th century. As
appliance efficiencies increase, they may become practical.

### [edit] Heating

<IMG>

<IMG>

Schematic of an active solar heating system

Most autonomous buildings are designed in such a way that they get full
advantage from certain phenomena. These are usually thermal mass and passive
solar heating and cooling. Examples of these are trombe walls and other
technologies as skylights

Passive solar heating can heat most buildings in even the coldest climates. In
colder climates, extra construction costs can be as little as 15% more than
new, conventional buildings. In warm climates, those having less than two
weeks of frosty nights per year, there is no cost impact.

The basic requirement for passive solar heating is that the solar collectors
must face the prevailing sunlight (south in the northern hemisphere, north in
the southern hemisphere), and the building must incorporate thermal mass to
keep it warm in the night.

The least expensive solar heating systems use the ground beneath a building
for thermal mass. Precipitation can carry away the heat, so the ground is
shielded with 6 m skirts of plastic insulation. The thermal mass of this
system is sufficiently inexpensive and large that it can store enough summer
heat to warm a building for the whole winter, and enough winter cold to cool
the building in summer. This "passive annual solar heating" is practical even
in regions that get little or no sunlight in winter.

In passive annual systems, the solar collector is often separate from (and
hotter or colder than) the living space. The building is often constructed
from insulation, e.g. straw-bale construction. Some buildings have been
aerodynamically designed so that convection via ducts and interior spaces
eliminates any need for electric fans.

A more modest "daily solar" design uses windows, R-30 insulation and a smaller
thermal mass. Modern krypton\- or argon-insulated windows permit normal-
looking windows to provide passive solar heat without compromising insulation
or structural strength. If a small heater is available for the coldest nights,
a slab or basement cistern can inexpensively provide the required thermal
mass.

In all systems, a small supplementary heater increases personal security and
reduces lifestyle impacts for a small reduction of autonomy. The two most
popular heaters for ultra-high-efficiency houses are a small heat pump, which
also provides air-conditioning, or a central hydronic (radiator) air heater
with water recirculating from the water heater.

Earth sheltering and windbreaks can also reduce the absolute amount of heat
needed by a building. Several feet below the earth, temperature ranges from 4
Â°C (40 Â°F) in North Dakota to 26 Â°C (80 Â°F),[11] in Southern Florida. Wind
breaks reduce the amount of heat carried away from a building.

Rounded, aerodynamic buildings also lose less heat.

Passivhaus (passive house) standard buildings from Europe that practically
have no or little heating. Just lots of insulation, high performance windows
and HRV ventilation all optimised for top performamce.

An increasing number of commercial buildings use a combined cycle with
cogeneration to provide heating, often water heating, from the output of a
natural gas reciprocating engine, gas turbine or stirling electric
generator.[12]

Houses designed to cope with interruptions in civil services generally
incorporate a wood stove, or heat and power from diesel fuel or bottled gas,
regardless of their other heating mechanisms.

Electric heaters and electric stoves may provide pollution-free heat
(depending on the power source), but use large amounts of electricity. If
enough electricity is provided by solar panels, wind turbines, or other means,
then electric heaters and stoves become a practical autonomous design.

### [edit] Water heating

Further information: Solar hot water

Solar water heaters are widely useful because they can save large amounts of
fuel. Also, small changes in lifestyle, such as doing laundry, dishes and
bathing on sunny days, can greatly increase their efficiency. To further
increase the efficiency of water heating, either with or without solar, hot
water heat recycling units recover heat from drainlines thereby increasing
water heating capacity and reducing the energy used to heat water.

The basic trick in a solar water heating system is to use a well-insulated
holding tank. Some systems are vacuum\- insulated, acting something like large
thermos bottles. The tank is filled with hot water on sunny days, and made
available at all times. Unlike a conventional tank water heater, the tank is
filled only when there is sunlight.

Good storage makes a smaller, higher-technology collector feasible. Such
collectors can use relatively exotic technologies, such as vacuum insulation,
and reflective concentration of sunlight.

Current practical, comfortable water-heating systems combine the solar heating
system with a thermostatic gas-powered flow-through heater, so that the
temperature of the water is consistent, and the amount is unlimited. This
again reduces life-style impacts at some cost in autonomy. Ideally, this would
be a cogeneration system that produces other energy, and uses locally-produced
fuels.

Heat recycling, cogenreration and solar pre-heating can save 50-75% of the gas
otherwise used. Also, some combinations provide redundant reliability by
having several sources of heat.

Some authorities advocate that bottled gas or natural gas be replaced by
biogas. However, this is usually impractical unless live-stock are on-site.
The wastes of a single family are usually insufficient to produce enough
methane for anything more than small amounts of cooking.

### [edit] Cooling

Earth sheltering or annualized passive solar systems substantially reduce the
cooling needed by a building. In temperate climates several feet below the
earth, the average temperature ranges from 4 Â°C (40 Â°F) in North Dakota to
26 Â°C (80 Â°F), in Southern Florida. Annualized passive solar buildings often
have buried, sloped water-tight skirts of insulation that extend 6 m (20 ft)
from the foundations, to prevent heat leakage between the earth used as
thermal mass, and the surface.

Less dramatic improvements are possible. Windows can be shaded in summer.
Eaves can be overhung to provide the necessary shade. These also shade the
walls of the house, reducing cooling costs.

Another trick is to cool the building's thermal mass at night, and then cool
the building from the thermal mass during the day. It helps to be able to
route cold air from a sky-facing radiator (perhaps an air heating solar
collector with an alternate purpose) or evaporative cooler directly through
the thermal mass. On clear nights, even in tropical areas, sky facing
radiators can cool below freezing.

If a circular building is aerodynamically smooth, and cooler than the ground,
it can be passively cooled by the "dome effect." Many installations have
reported that a reflective or light colored dome induces a local vertical heat
driven vortex that sucks cooler overhead air downward into a dome if the dome
is vented properly (a single overhead vent, and peripheral vents). Some people
have reported a temperature differential as high as 8 Â°C (15 Â°F) between the
inside of the dome and the outside. Buckminster Fuller discovered this effect
with a simple house design adapted from a grain silo, and adapted his Dymaxion
house and geodesic domes to use it.

Refrigerators and air conditioners operating from the waste heat of a diesel
engine exhaust, heater flue or solar collector are entering use. These use the
same principles as a gas refrigerator. Normally, the heat from a flue powers
an "absorptive chiller." The cold water or brine from the chiller is used to
cool air or a refrigerated space.

Cogeneration is popular in new commercial buildings. In current cogeneration
systems small gas turbines or stirling engines powered from natural gas
produce electricity and their exhaust drives an absorptive chiller, heats
water.

A truck trailer refrigerator operating from the waste heat of a tractor's
diesel exhaust was demonstrated by NRG Solutions, Inc. NRG developed a
hydronic ammonia gas heat exchanger and vaporizer, the two essential new, not
commercially available components of a waste heat driven refrigerator.

A similar scheme (multiphase cooling) can be by a multistage evaporative
cooler. The air is passed through a spray of salt solution to dehumidify it,
then through a spray of water solution to cool it, then another salt solution
to dehumidify it again. The brine has to be regenerated, and that can be done
economically with a low temperature solar still. Multiphase evaporative
coolers can lower the air's temperature by 50 F, and still control humidity.
If the brine regenerator uses high heat, they also partially sterilise the
air.

If enough electric power is available, cooling can be provided by conventional
air conditioning using a heat pump.

### [edit] Food production

Further information: Grow house

Food production has often been included in historic autonomous projects to
provide security.[citation needed] Skilled, intensive gardening can support an
adult from as little as 15 square meters of land[citation needed], possibly
requiring the use of organic farming and aeroponics. Some proven intensive,
low-effort food-production systems include urban gardening (indoors and
outdoors). Indoor cultivation may be set-up using hydroponics, while outdoor
cultivation may be done using permaculture, forest gardening, no-till farming,
and do nothing farming.

Greenhouses are also sometimes included (see Earthship Biotincture). Sometimes
they are also outfitted with irrigation systems or heat sink-systems which can
respectively irrigate the plants or help to store energy from the sun and
redistribute it at night (when the greenhouses starts to cool down).[citation
needed]

### [edit] Communication

An increasing number of activists provide free or very inexpensive web and
email services using cooperative computer networks that run wireless ad hoc
networks. Network service is provided by a cooperative of neighbors, each
operating a router as a household appliance. These minimize wired
infrastructure, and its costs and vulnerabilities. Private Internet protocol
networks set up in this way can operate without the use of a commercial
provider.

Rural electrical grids can be wired with "optical phase cable", in which one
or more of the steel armor wires are replaced with steel tubes containing
fiber optics.[13]

Satellite Internet access can provide high speed connectivity to remote
locations, however these are significantly more expensive than wire-based or
terrestrial wireless systems. Wimax and forms of packet radio can also be
used. Depending on the speed and latency of these networks they may be capable
of relaying VoIP traffic, negating the need for separate telephony services.
Finally, the Internet Radio Linking Project provides potential for blending
older (cheap) local radio broadcasting with the increased range of the
internet.

Depending on the location a mobile phone network may be available which can
provide voice and data services. satellite-based telephone systems can also be
used, as either fixed installations or portable handsets and can be integrated
into a PABX or local IP-based network.

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Sustainable development portal  
  * Arcology
  * Architectural engineering
  * Appropriate technology
  * Biosphere
  * Biosphere 2
  * BIOS-3
  * Ecovillage

  * Environmental engineering
  * Hydrogen station
  * Microgeneration
  * Moladi
  * Renewable heat
  * Vertical farming

  
## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Vale, Brenda and Robert (2000). The New Autonomous House. London: Thames & Hudson Ltd. ISBN 0-500-34176-1. .
  2. ^ "New Alchemy Institute" (Website). The Green Center. Retrieved on 2007-09-16.
  3. ^ WHO | Nutrient minerals in drinking-water and the potential health consequences of consumption of demineralized and remineralized and altered mineral content drinking-water: Consensus of the meeting
  4. ^ Cistern Design, University of Alaska, referenced 2007-12-27
  5. ^ Swales replacing drains: Paul Hawken, Amory Lovins and Hunter Lovins, "Natural Capitalism," ch. 5, pp83. The cited development is Village Homes, Davis, California, built in the 1970s by Michael and Judy Corbett
  6. ^ Sunfrost rates 15 cu. ft. refrigerators at 0.27KWh/day (2007-12-27), while Dometic (formerly Servel) gas refrigerators cool only 8 cu. ft. for 325W continuous (i.e. 7.8 KWh/day) ALternatively, they use about 8 gallons of LP gas per month, which in most places is more expensive than the equivalent electricity.(2007-12-27)
  7. ^ Paul Gipe, "Wind Power for Home and Business"
  8. ^ Gipe, ibid.
  9. ^ Eaton power; see the specifications and manuals. Referenced 2007-12-27
  10. ^ Kohler Generators; see the specifications and manuals. Referenced 2007-12-27
  11. ^ Stephens, Don. September 2005. "'Annualized Geo-Solar Heating' as a Sustainable Residential-scale Solution for Temperate Climates iwht Less than Ideal Daily Heating Season Solar Availability." ("Requested Paper for the Global Sustainable Building Conference 2005, Tokyo, Japan"). Greenershelter.org website. Retrieved on 2007-09-16.
  12. ^ [http://www.microturbine.com/_docs/WCEMC04.pdf Capstone Microturbine White-Paper (PDF) Retrieved on 2007-12-28.
  13. ^ Northern Economics Inc. and Electric Power Systems Inc. April 2001. "Screening Report for Alaska Rural Energy Plan." (Report published on government website). Alaska Department of Commerce, Community, and Economic Development, via dced.state.ak.us. Retrieved on 2007-09-16.

## [edit] External links

<IMG>

<IMG>

Hexayurt dimensions

  * The Buckminster Fuller Institute is still in existence. B. Fuller left thousands of pages of notes to the university where he last taught.
  * There is a section on Autonomous Houses in the Reality Sculptors wiki, including links to a mailing list which frequently discusses autonomous design considerations.
  * Designs for a geodesic dome version of an Autonomous House can be found at http://reality.sculptors.com/~salsbury/House/
  * "Wind Power for Home and Business" by Paul Gipe
  * An opinion piece by Brenda and Robert Vale
  * www.off-grid.net
  * Bad End 2 - 21st Century Hobbit Hole \- Precast concrete in home construction
  * Hexayurt Shelter System \- a public domain autonomous building system for refugees and poor villagers

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autonomous_building"

Categories: Building engineering | Sustainable building | Shelters

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since July 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * FranÃ§ais
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 16 April 2009, at 21:10 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



