
# Business process outsourcing

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article is written like a magazine article; it does not use the direct,
balanced tone expected of an encyclopedia. Please discuss this issue on the
talk page. Editing help is available. (December 2008)  
<IMG>

This article contains weasel words, vague phrasing that often accompanies
biased or unverifiable information. Such statements should be clarified or
removed. (December 2008)  
Business process outsourcing (BPO) is a form of outsourcing that involves the
contracting of the operations and responsibilities of a specific business
functions (or processes) to a third-party service provider. Originally, this
was associated with manufacturing firms, such as Coca Cola that outsourced
large segments of its supply chain.[1]. In the contemporary context, it is
primarily used to refer to the outsourcing of services.

BPO is typically categorized into back office outsourcing - which includes
internal business functions such as human resources or finance and accounting,
and front office outsourcing - which includes customer-related services such
as contact center services.

BPO that is contracted outside a company's country is called offshore
outsourcing. BPO that is contracted to a company's neighboring (or nearby)
country is called nearshore outsourcing.

Given the proximity of BPO to the information technology industry, it is also
categorized as an information technology enabled service or ITES. Knowledge
process outsourcing(KPO) and legal process outsourcing (LPO) are some of the
sub-segments of business process outsourcing industry.

## Contents

  * 1 Industry size
  * 2 BPO increasing the flexibility of organizations
  * 3 Threats
  * 4 References
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Industry size

India has revenues of 10.9 billion USD[2] from offshore BPO and 30 billion USD
from IT and total BPO (expected in FY 2008). India thus has some 5-6% share of
the total BPO Industry, but a commanding 63% share of the offshore component.
This 63% is a drop from the 70% offshore share that India enjoyed last year,
despite the industry growing 38% in India last year, other locations like
Eastern Europe, Philippines, Morocco, Egypt and South Africa have emerged to
take a share of the market. China is also trying to grow from a very small
base in this industry. However, while the BPO industry is expected to continue
to grow in India, its market share of the offshore piece is expected to
decline. Important centers in India are Bangalore, Hyderabad, Mumbai, Pune,
Chennai and New Delhi.

The top five Indian BPO exporters for 2006-2007 according to NASSCOM are
Genpact, WNS Global Services, Transworks Information Services, IBM Daksh, and
TCS BPO.[3]

According to McKinsey, the global "addressable" BPO market is worth $122 -
$154 billion, of which: 35-40 retail banking, 25-35 insurance, 10-12
travel/hospitality, 10-12 auto, 8-10 telecoms, 8 pharma, 10-15 others and
20-25 is finance, accounting and HR. Moreover, they estimate that 8% of that
capacity was utilized as of 2006.

## [edit] BPO increasing the flexibility of organizations

One of the most important advantages of BPO is the way in which it helps to
increase a companyâs flexibility. However, several sources have different
ways in which they perceive organizational flexibility. Therefore business
process outsourcing enhances the flexibility of an organization in different
ways.

Most services provided by BPO vendors are offered on a fee-for-service basis.
This helps a company becoming more flexible by transforming fixed into
variable costs.[4] A variable cost structure helps a company responding to
changes in required capacity and does not requisite a company in investing in
assets and hereby making the company more flexible.[5] Outsourcing may provide
a firm with increased flexibility in its resource management and reduce
response times to major environmental changes.

Another way in which BPO contributes to a companyâs flexibility is that a
company is able to focus on its core competencies, without being burdened by
the demands of bureaucratic dictate.[6] Key employees are herewith released
from performing non-core or administrative processes and can invest more time
and energy in building the firmâs core businesses.[7] The key in this lies
in knowing which of the main value drivers to focus on â customer intimacy,
product leadership, or operational excellence. Focusing on one of these
drivers may help a company create a competitive edge.[8]

A third way in which BPO increases organizational flexibility is by increasing
the speed of business processes. Using techniques such as linear programming
is a way to reduce cycle time and inventory levels, which reduces a
companyâs slack. Supply chain management with the effective use of supply
chain partners and business process outsourcing increases the speed of several
business processes, such as the throughput in the case of a manufacturing
company.[9]

Finally, flexibility is seen as a stage in the organizational life cycle. BPO
helped to transform Nortel from a bureaucratic organization into a very agile
organization. A company can hereby help maintaining ambitious growth goals,
which do not fit with regular incumbent strategies.[10] BPO therefore allows
firms to retain their entrepreneurial speed and agility, which they would
otherwise sacrifice in order to become efficient as they greatly expanded. It
avoids a premature internal transition from its informal entrepreneurial phase
to a more bureaucratic mode of operation.[11]

Although the above-mentioned arguments favor the view that BPO increases the
flexibility of organizations, management needs to be careful with the
implementation of it. Some tends to change their attitudes, personalities and
character on how the way they talk to other clients. Although BPO has many
potential advantages there are a few stumbling blocks, which could counter
these advantages. Among problems, which arise in practice are: A failure to
meet service levels, unclear contractual issues, changing requirements and
unforeseen charges. When BPO does not work out as planned the company might
well experience the way in which BPO makes a company very dependent on a
vendor and therefore very inflexible. Consequently, these challenges need to
be considered before a company decides to engage in business process
outsourcing[12]

## [edit] Threats

Risk is the major drawback with Business Process Outsourcing. Outsourcing of
an Information System, for example, can cause security risks both from a
communication and from a privacy perspective. From a knowledge perspective, a
changing attitude in employees, underestimation of running costs and the major
risk of losing independence, outsourcing leads to a different relationship
between an organization and its contractor.[13][14]

Risks and threats of outsourcing must therefore be managed, to achieve any
benefits. In order to manage outsourcing in a structured way, maximizing
positive outcome, and minimizing risks and avoiding any threats, a Business
Continuity Management (BCM) model is setup. BCM consists of a set of steps, to
successfully identify, manage and control that business processes that are, or
can be outsourced.[15]  
Another framework, more focused on the identification process of potential
outsourceable Information Systems, identified as AHP, is explained.[16]  
L. Willcocks, M. Lacity and G. Fitzgerald identify several contracting
problems companies face, ranging from unclear contract formatting, to a lack
of understanding of technical IT- processes.[17]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Tas, J. & Sunder, S. 2004, Financial Services Business Process Outscourcing, Communications of the ACM, Vol 47, No. 5
  2. ^ Cover Story
  3. ^ NASSCOM Announces Top-15 ITES-BPO Exporters Rankings for FY 06-07
  4. ^ Willcocks, L., Hindle, J., Feeny, D. & Lacity, M. 2004, IT and Business Process Outsourcing: The Knowledge Potential, Information Systems Management, Vol. 21, pp 7â15
  5. ^ Gilley, K.M., Rasheed, A. 2000. Making More by Doing Less: An Analysis of Outsourcing and its Effects on Firm Performance. Journal of Management, 26 (4): 763-790.
  6. ^ Kakabadse, A., Kakabadse. N. 2002. Trends in Outsourcing: Contrasting USA and Europe. European Management Journal Vol. 20, No. 2: 189â198
  7. ^ Weerakkody, Vishanth, Currie, L. Wendy and Ekanayake, Yamaya. 2003. Re-engineering business processes through application service providers - challenges, issues and complexities. Business Process Management Journal Vol. 9 No. 6: 776-794
  8. ^ Leavy, B. 2004. Outsourcing strategies: opportunities and risk. Strategy and Leadership, 32 (6) : 20-25.
  9. ^ Tas, Jeroen, Sunder, Shyam. 2004. Financial Services Business Process Outsourcing. COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM Vol. 47, No. 5
  10. ^ Fischer, L.M. 2001. From vertical to Virtual; How Nortelâs Supplier Alliances Extend the enterprise [online]. Strategy+Business, Available from http://www.strategy-business.com/press/16635507/11153 [Accessed 5 February 2008]
  11. ^ (Leavy 2004, 20-25)
  12. ^ Michel, Vaughan, Fitzgerald, Guy. 1997. The IT outsourcing market place: vendors and their selection. Journal of Information Technology 12: 223-237
  13. ^ Bunmi Cynthia Adeleye, Fenio Annansingh and Miguel Baptista Nunes. "Risk management practices in IS outsourcing: an investigation into commercial banks in Nigeria", International Journal of Information Management 24 (2004): 167-180.
  14. ^ K. Altinkemer, A. Chaturvedi and R. Gulati. "Information systems outsourcing: Issues and evidence", International Journal of Information Management 14- 4 (1994): 252- 268.
  15. ^ Forbes Gibb, and Steven Buchanan. "A framework for business continuity management", International Journal of Information Management 26- 2 (2006): 128- 141.
  16. ^ Chyan Yang and Jen-Bor Huang. "A decision model for IS outsourcing", International Journal of Information Management 20- 3 (2000): 225- 239.
  17. ^ L. Willcocks, M. Lacity and G. Fitzgerald. "Information technology outsourcing in Europe and the USA: Assessment issues", International Journal of Information Management 15- 5 (1995): 333- 351.

## [edit] See also

  * Outsourcing
  * Offshoring
  * Nearshoring
  * Homeshoring
  * Globalization
  * List of call centre companies
  * Recruitment
  * Recruitment Process Outsourcing
  * Software testing outsourcing
  * BPO security
  * Business process outsourcing in India
  * Business process outsourcing in the Philippines
  * Website Management Outsourcing
  * Captive service
  * Offshoring Research Network
  * Legal outsourcing

## [edit] External links

  * Report on Business Process Outsourcing (BPO)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_process_outsourcing"

Categories: Business process | Business terms | Information technology
management

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing style editing from December 2008
| All articles needing style editing | Articles with weasel words from
December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 15:29 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



