
# Chief operating officer

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2008)  
<IMG>

This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this article if you can. (August 2008)  
A chief operating officer or chief operations officer (COO) is a corporate
officer responsible for managing the day-to-day activities of the corporation
and for operations management (OM). The COO is one of the highest-ranking
members of an organization's senior management, monitoring the daily
operations of the company and reporting to the board of directors and the top
executive officer, usually the chief executive officer (CEO). The COO is
usually an executive or senior officers.

The focus of the COO is on operations management, which means he or she is
responsible for the development, design, operation, and improvement of the
systems that create and deliver the firm's products/services. The duties of
the COO may reside in certain organizations with a vice president of
operations. The COO is responsible for ensuring that business operations are
efficient and effective and that proper management of resources, distribution
of goods and services to customers, and analysis of queue systems is done.

COOs ideally need to have domain knowledge of the business & industry,
understand modern management theories (Total Quality Management, Kaizen),
employ process/quality improvement techniques (business process reengineering,
Six Sigma) and sometimes quality process standards if required by customers or
desired by the company (ISO 9001).

Functions of a COO:

  1. Marshal limited resources as set out by the chief executive officer and the board of directors to the most productive uses with the aim of creating maximum value for the company's stakeholders.
  2. Lead by developing and cascading the organizations strategy/mission statement to the lower ranking staff, and implementing appropriate rewards/recognition and coaching/corrective practices to align personnel with company goals.
  3. Plan by prioritizing customer, employee and organizational requirements
  4. Maintaining and monitoring staffing, levels, Knowledge-Skill-Attitude (KSA), expectations and motivation to fulfill organizational requirements
  5. Drive performance measures for the measurement of an operation's performance and consideration of efficiency versus effectiveness, often in the form of dashboards convenient for review of high level key indicators.

<IMG>This business-related article is a stub. You can help by expanding it.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Corporate titles  
Titles

Chief accounting officer Â· Chief administrative officer Â· Chief analytics
officer Â· Chief brand officer Â· Chief channel officer Â· Chief compliance
officer Â· Chief communications officer Â· Chief data officer Â· Chief
executive officer Â· Chief financial officer Â· Chief information officer Â·
Chief information security officer Â· Chief knowledge officer Â· Chief
learning officer Â· Chief legal officer Â· Chief marketing officer Â· Chief
medical officer Â· Chief networking officer Â· Chief operating officer Â·
Chief procurement officer Â· Chief risk officer Â· Chief science officer Â·
Chief strategy officer Â· Chief technology officer Â· Chief visionary officer  
See also

Board of directors Â· Chairman of the board Â· Corporate governance Â·
Creative director Â· Executive compensation Â· Executive director Â· Fiduciary
Â· General counsel Â· Management team Â· Managing director Â· Non-executive
director Â· Corner office  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chief_operating_officer"

Categories: Business stubs | Business and financial operations occupations |
Corporate governance | Management occupations

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from January 2008 | All articles
lacking sources | Cleanup from August 2008 | All pages needing cleanup

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 22 March 2009, at 11:51 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



