
# Outline

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009)  
This article is about the prewriting technique of outlining. For other uses,
see Outline (disambiguation).

"Outlining" redirects here. For the musical technique, see lining out.

Sister project Look up outline in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
An outline or hierarchical outline is a list of related items arranged
hierarchically to depict their relationships.

They are often used by students for research papers. Outlines provide a
summary showing the logical flow of a paper. They are useful because they:

  1. help the writer organize their thoughts before getting bogged down in word choice and sentence structure;
  2. show which ideas need illustration or elaboration; and
  3. help the writer decide on an organizational technique for the report, whether it be logical, chronological, or categorical in nature.

## Contents

  * 1 Outlining reports
    * 1.1 Alphanumeric outlines
      * 1.1.1 Sample alphanumeric outline
    * 1.2 Family Tree outline
    * 1.3 Decimal outlines
      * 1.3.1 Sample decimal outline
  * 2 Outlining stories
    * 2.1 Location outlines
    * 2.2 Plot outlines
  * 3 References
  * 4 Notes

  
## [edit] Outlining reports

Textbooks generally recommend that, before constructing an outline, a writer
should research the topic and take notesâpreferably on index cardsâas they
go. The notes need not be more than a summary of what the author thinks is
important. Each note card normally has a heading (a slug) in the upper-left
hand corner. Each slug later becomes a heading, or subheading, in the outline
and the writer can later lay their cards on a table, grouping those that
belong together. This creates a rough division of the topic. The writer may
then put the cards in an order that approximates a final version.

Experts recommend that an outline have three to five main categories. If you
have more than that, look for ways to combine smaller segments into broader
topics. If you have only one subpoint, integrate it with the point above or
reorganize. Also avoid overlapping between categories.

### [edit] Alphanumeric outlines

An alphanumeric outline uses Roman numerals, capitalized letters, Arabic
numerals, and lowercase letters, in that order. Each numeral or letter is
followed by a period, and each item is capitalized:

#### [edit] Sample alphanumeric outline

    Thesis statement: E-mail and internet monitoring; is it really an invasion of the employees' rights in the workplace?
    
    I. Why do over 80% of today's companies monitor their employees? 
    A. To prevent fraudulent activities, theft, and other workplace related violations.
    B. To more efficiently monitor employee productivity.
    C. To prevent any legal liabilities due to harassing or offensive communications.
    II. What are the employees privacy rights when it comes to EM/S (Electronic Monitoring and Surveillance) in the workplace? 
    A. American employees have basically no legal protection from mean and snooping bosses. 
    1\. There are no federal or State laws protecting employees.
    2\. Employees may assert privacy protection for their own personal effects.
    B. Bosses believe that work is to be done so privacy is not necessary.
Note that each category above has at least two subcategories.

Some call the Roman numerals above a-heads, the capitalized letters, b-heads,
and so on. Some writers also prefer to insert a blank line between the a-heads
and b-heads (N.B. these people keep the b-heads and c-heads together, though).

If more levels of outline are needed, lowercase roman numerals and numbers and
lowercase letters with single and double parenthesis can be used, although the
exact order is not well defined, and usage varies widely. The Chicago Manual
of Style[1] suggests the sequence I. A. 1. a) (1) (a) i) (capital roman
numerals with a period, capital letters with a period, numerals with a period,
lowercase letters with a single parenthesis, numerals with a double
parenthesis, lowercase letters with a double parenthesis, and lowercase roman
numerals with a single parentheses) for the first seven levels. Another scheme
uses I. A. 1. a. i. for the first five levels, then repeats those with a
single parenthesis for the next five â I) A) 1) a) i) â and with a double
parenthesis for the next five â (I) (A) (1) (a) (i).

### [edit] Family Tree outline

Family Tree outlines are used to show people, their spouses and their children
in chronological order, like a shorter way to present research.

  
1\. Gregory CURIOUS

    
    A. Patricia JONES (1st marriage) 
    
    1\. Chloe CURIOUS
    2\. Lola CURIOUS
    B. Katie HOGLEG (2nd marriage) 
    
    3\. Jenny CURIOUS 
    
    
    A. Paul SMITH (1st marriage) 
    
    1\. John SMITH
    2\. Jill SMITH
    4\. Vincent CURIOUS
Here you can see that Gregory had two wives (Patricia and Katie) and 4
children (Chloe, Lola, Jenny and Vincent) and you can see who he had each
child with. You can also see his son-in-law (Paul Smith) and his 2
grandchildren who are Jenny's and Paul's. This is very useful in graphing
descendents rather than ancestors.

### [edit] Decimal outlines

The decimal outline format has the advantage of showing how every item at
every level relates to the whole:

#### [edit] Sample decimal outline

    Thesis statement: --- 
    1.0 Introduction
    
    
    1.1 Brief history of Liz Claiborne
    1.2 Corporate environment
    2.0 Career opportunities 
    2.1 Operations management 
    2.1.1 Traffic
    2.1.2 International trade and corporate customs
    2.1.3 Distribution
    . . . . . . . . .
## [edit] Outlining stories

Outline is also a name for a prose telling of a story to be turned into a
screenplay. Sometimes called a one page (one page synopsis, about 1 - 3
pages). It is generally longer and more detailed than a standard synopsis (1 -
2 paragraphs), but shorter and less detailed than a treatment or a step
outline. There are different ways to do these outlines and they vary in
length.

### [edit] Location outlines

### [edit] Plot outlines

In comics, an outline--often pluralised as outlines\--refers to a stage in the
development where the story has been broken down very loosely in a style
similar to storyboarding in film development.

The pencils will be very loose (i.e., the sketch rough), the main aim being to
lay out the flow of panels across a page, ensure the story successfully builds
suspense and to work out points of view, camera angles and character positions
within panels. This can also be referred to as a plot outline or a layout.

## [edit] References

  * Mary Ellen Guffey, "Organizing and Writing Business Messages," Business Communication: Process and Product, p. 160-161.
  * "Numbers: Lists and Outlines," Manual for Writers and Editors (Merriam-Webster, Incorporated: 1998), p. 103.
  * White, Basil (1996) Developing Products and Their Rhetoric from a Single Hierarchical Model, 1996 Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Society for Technical Communication, 43, 223-224. [1]
  * OWL: Online Writing Lab, Purdue University
  * "Report writing," Britannica Student Encyclopedia, EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica Online (Accessed January 5, 2006)
  * William E. Coles, Jr. "Outline," World Book Online (Accessed January 5, 2006)
  * Ted Goranson's About this Particular Outliner 'Outlining and Styles'

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ The Chicago Manual of Style, 14th ed., The University of Chicago Press, 1993

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outline"

Categories: Film techniques | Writing

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from January 2009 | All articles
lacking sources

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 19 April 2009, at 20:51 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



