
# Brainstorming

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Brainstorming is a group creativity technique designed to generate a large
number of ideas for the solution of a problem. The method was first
popularized in the late 1930s by Alex Faickney Osborn in a book called Applied
Imagination. Osborn proposed that groups could double their creative output
with brainstorming.[1]

Although brainstorming has become a popular group technique, researchers have
not found evidence of its effectiveness for enhancing either quantity or
quality of ideas generated. Because of such problems as distraction, social
loafing, evaluation apprehension, and production blocking, brainstorming
groups are little more effective than other types of groups, and they are
actually less effective than individuals working independently.[2][3][4] In
the Encyclopedia of Creativity, Tudor Rickards, in his entry on brainstorming,
summarizes its controversies and indicates the dangers of conflating
productivity in group work with quantity of ideas.[5]

Although traditional brainstorming does not increase the productivity of
groups, it may still provide benefits, such as boosting morale, enhancing work
enjoyment, and improving team work. Thus, numerous attempts have been made to
improve brainstorming or use more effective variations of the basic technique.  
  

## Contents

  * 1 Ground Rules
  * 2 Method
    * 2.1 Set the problem
    * 2.2 Create a background memo
    * 2.3 Select participants
    * 2.4 Create a list of lead questions
    * 2.5 Session conduct
    * 2.6 The process
    * 2.7 Evaluation
  * 3 Variations
    * 3.1 Nominal group technique
    * 3.2 Group passing technique
    * 3.3 Team idea mapping method
    * 3.4 Electronic brainstorming
    * 3.5 Directed brainstorming
    * 3.6 Individual brainstorming
    * 3.7 Other variations
  * 4 Conclusion
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References

  
## [edit] Ground Rules

There are four basic rules in brainstorming.[6] These are intended to reduce
social inhibitions among groups members, stimulate idea generation, and
increase overall creativity of the group.

  1. Focus on quantity: This rule is a means of enhancing divergent production, aiming to facilitate problem solving through the maxim, quantity breeds quality. The assumption is that the greater the number of ideas generated, the greater the chance of producing a radical and effective solution.
  2. Withhold criticism: In brainstorming, criticism of ideas generated should be put 'on hold'. Instead, participants should focus on extending or adding to ideas, reserving criticism for a later 'critical stage' of the process. By suspending judgment, participants will feel free to generate unusual ideas.
  3. Welcome unusual ideas: To get a good and long list of ideas, unusual ideas are welcomed. They can be generated by looking from new perspectives and suspending assumptions. These new ways of thinking may provide better solutions.
  4. Combine and improve ideas: Good ideas may be combined to form a single better good idea, as suggested by the slogan "1+1=3". It is believed to stimulate the building of ideas by a process of association.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Diagram of a brainstorming session

## [edit] Method

### [edit] Set the problem

Before a brainstorming session, it is critical to define the problem. The
problem must be clear, not too big, and captured in a specific question such
as "What service for mobile phones is not available now, but needed?". If the
problem is too big, the facilitator should break it into smaller components,
each with its own question. Some problems are multi-dimensional and non-
quantified, for example "What are the aspects involved in being a successful
entrepreneur?". Finding solutions for this kind of problem can be done with
morphological analysis (problem-solving).

### [edit] Create a background memo

The background memo is the invitation and informational letter for the
participants, containing the session name, problem, time, date, and place. The
problem is described in the form of a question, and some example ideas are
given. The ideas are solutions to the problem, and used when the session slows
down or goes off-track. The memo is sent to the participants well in advance,
so that they can think about the problem beforehand.

### [edit] Select participants

The facilitator composes the brainstorming panel, consisting of the
participants and an idea collector. A group of 10 or fewer members is
generally more productive. Many variations are possible but the following
composition is suggested.

  * Several core members of the project who have proved themselves.
  * Several guests from outside the project, with affinity to the problem.
  * One idea collector who records the suggested ideas.

### [edit] Create a list of lead questions

During the brainstorm session the creativity may decrease. At this moment, the
facilitator should stimulate creativity by suggesting a lead question to
answer, such as Can we combine these ideas? or How about looking from another
perspective?. It is best to prepare a list of such leads before the session
begins.

### [edit] Session conduct

The facilitator leads the brainstorming session and ensures that ground rules
are followed. The steps in a typical session are:

  1. A warm-up session, to expose novice participants to the criticism-free environment. A simple problem is brainstormed, for example What should be the CEO retirement present? or What can be improved in Microsoft Windows?.
  2. The facilitator presents the problem and gives a further explanation if needed.
  3. The facilitator asks the brainstorming group for their ideas.
  4. If no ideas are forthcoming, the facilitator suggests a lead to encourage creativity.
  5. All participants present their ideas, and the idea collector records them.
  6. To ensure clarity, participants may elaborate on their ideas.
  7. When time is up, the facilitator organizes the ideas based on the topic goal and encourages discussion.
  8. Ideas are categorized.
  9. The whole list is reviewed to ensure that everyone understands the ideas.
  10. Duplicate ideas and obviously infeasible solutions are removed.
  11. The facilitator thanks all participants and gives each a token of appreciation.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Process of conducting a brainstorming session

### [edit] The process

  * Participants who have ideas but were unable to present them are encouraged to write down the ideas and present them later.
  * The idea collector should number the ideas, so that the chairperson can use the number to encourage an idea generation goal, for example: We have 44 ideas now, letâs get it to 50!.
  * The idea collector should repeat the idea in the words he or she has written vbit, to confirm that it expresses the meaning intended by the originator.
  * When more participants are having ideas, the one with the most associated idea should have priority. This to encourage elaboration on previous ideas.
  * During a brainstorming session, managers and other superiors may be discouraged from attending, as it may inhibit and reduce the effect of the four basic rules, especially the generation of unusual ideas.

### [edit] Evaluation

Brainstorming is not just about generating ideas for others to evaluate and
select. Usually the group itself will, in its final stage, evaluate the ideas
and select one as the solution to the problem proposed to the group.

  * The solution should not require resources or skills the members of the group do not have or cannot acquire.
  * If acquiring additional resources or skills is necessary, that needs to be the first part of the solution.
  * There must be a way to measure progress and success.
  * The steps to carry out the solution must be clear to all, and amenable to being assigned to the members so that each will have an important role.
  * There must be a common decision making process to enable a coordinated effort to proceed, and to reassign tasks as the project unfolds.
  * There should be evaluations at milestones to decide whether the group is on track toward a final solution.
  * There should be incentives to participation so that participants maintain their efforts.

## [edit] Variations

### [edit] Nominal group technique

The nominal group technique is a type of brainstorming that encourages all
participants to have an equal say in the process. It is also used to generate
a ranked list of ideas.

Participants are asked to write their ideas anonymously. Then the moderator
collects the ideas and each is voted on by the group. The vote can be as
simple as a show of hands in favor of a given idea. This process is called
distillation.

After distillation, the top ranked ideas may be sent back to the group or to
subgroups for further brainstorming. For example, one group may work on the
color required in a product. Another group may work on the size, and so forth.
Each group will come back to the whole group for ranking the listed ideas.
Sometimes ideas that were previously dropped may be brought forward again once
the group has re-evaluated the ideas.

It is important that the facilitator be trained in this process before
attempting to facilitate this technique. The group should be primed and
encouraged to embrace the process. Like all team efforts, it may take a few
practice sessions to train the team in the method before tackling the
important ideas.

### [edit] Group passing technique

Each person in a circular group writes down one idea, and then passes the
piece of paper to the next person in a clockwise direction, who adds some
thoughts. This continues until everybody gets his or her original piece of
paper back. By this time, it is likely that the group will have extensively
elaborated on each idea.

The group may also create an "Idea Book" and post a distribution list or
routing slip to the front of the book. On the first page is a description of
the problem. The first person to receive the book lists his or her ideas and
then routes the book to the next person on the distribution list. The second
person can log new ideas or add to the ideas of the previous person. This
continues until the distribution list is exhausted. A follow-up "read out"
meeting is then held to discuss the ideas logged in the book. This technique
takes longer, but it allows individuals time to think deeply about the
problem.

### [edit] Team idea mapping method

This method of brainstorming works by the method of association. It may
improve collaboration and increase the quantity of ideas, and is designed so
that all attendees participate and no ideas are rejected.

The process begins with a well-defined topic. Each participant brainstorms
individual, then all the ideas are merged onto one large idea map. During this
consolidation phase, participants may discover a common understanding of the
issues as they share the meanings behind their ideas. During this sharing, new
ideas may arise by the association, and they are added to the map as well.
Once all the ideas are captured, the group can prioritize and/or take action.

### [edit] Electronic brainstorming

Electronic brainstorming is a computerized version of the manual brainwriting
technique. It can be done via email and may be browser based, or use peer-to-
peer software.

The facilitator sends the question out to group members, and they contribute
independently by sending their ideas back to the facilitator. The facilitator
then compiles a list of ideas and sends it back to the group for further
feedback. Electronic brainstorming eliminates many of the problems of standard
brainstorming, such as production blocking and evaluation apprehension. An
additional advantage of this method is that all ideas can be archived
electronically in their original form, and then retrieved later for further
thought and discussion. Electronic brainstorming also enables much larger
groups to brainstorm on a topic than would normally be productive in a
traditional brainstorming session.

Other brainstorming techniques are web-based, and allow contributors to post
their comments anonymously through the use of avatars. This technique also
allows users to log on over an extended time period, typically one or two
weeks, to allow participants some "soak time" before posting their ideas and
feedback. This technique has been used particularly in the field of new
product development, but can be applied in any number of areas where
collecting and evaluating ideas would be useful. Professor Olivier Toubia of
Columbia University has conducted extensive research in the field of idea
generation and has concluded that incentives are extremely valuable within the
brainstorming context.[7]

### [edit] Directed brainstorming

Directed brainstorming is a variation of electronic brainstorming (described
above). It can be done manually or with computers. Directed brainstorming
works when the solution space (that is, the criteria for evaluating a good
idea) is known prior to the session. If known, that criteria can be used to
intentionally constrain the ideation process.

In directed brainstorming, each participant is given one sheet of paper (or
electronic form) and told the brainstorming question. They are asked to
produce one response and stop, then all of the papers (or forms) are randomly
swapped among the participants. The participants are asked to look at the idea
they received and to create a new idea that improves on that idea based on the
initial criteria. The forms are then swapped again and respondents are asked
to improve upon the ideas, and the process is repeated for three or more
rounds.

In the laboratory, directed brainstorming has been found to almost triple the
productivity of groups over electronic brainstorming.[8]

### [edit] Individual brainstorming

"Individual Brainstorming" is the use of brainstorming on a solitary basis. It
typically includes such techniques as free writing, free speaking, word
association, and the "spider web," which is a visual note taking technique in
which a people diagram their thoughts. Individual brainstorming is a useful
method in creative writing and has been shown to be superior to traditional
group brainstorming.[9]

### [edit] Other variations

One of the problems can be to find the best questions to ask. This has been
called questorming.[10] Another of the problems for brainstorming can be to
find the best evaluation methods for a problem.

## [edit] Conclusion

Brainstorming is a popular method of group interaction in both educational and
business settings. Although it does not provide a measurable advantage in
creative output, brainstorming is an enjoyable exercise that is typically well
received by participants. Newer variations of brainstorming seek to overcome
barriers like production blocking and may well prove superior to the original
technique. How well these newer methods work, and whether or not they should
be classified as brainstorming, are questions that require further research.

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Thinking portal  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Brainstorming  
  * Creativity
  * Invention
  * Innovation
  * List of mind mapping software
  * 6-3-5 Brainwriting

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Osborn, A.F. (1963) Applied imagination: Principles and procedures of creative problem solving (Third Revised Edition). New York, NY: Charles Scribnerâs Sons.
  2. ^ Nijstad, B. A., Stroebe, W., Lodewijkx, H. F. M. (2003). Production blocking and idea generation: Does blocking interfere with cognitive processes? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 531-548.
  3. ^ Diehl, M., & Stroebe, W. (1991). Productivity loss in idea-generating groups: tracking down the blocking effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 392-403.
  4. ^ Mullen, B., Johnson, C., & Salas, E. (1991). Productivity loss in brainstorming groups: a meta-analytic integration. Basic and Applied Social Psychology. 12, 3-23.
  5. ^ Rickards, T., (1999) Brainstorming, M Runco & S Pritzker, Eds, Encyclopedia of Creativity, San Diego: Academic Press Vol 1 219-228.
  6. ^ Osborn, A.F. (1963) Applied imagination: Principles and procedures of creative problem solving (Third Revised Edition). New York, NY: Charles Scribnerâs Sons.
  7. ^ Toubia, Olivier, "Idea Generation, Creativity, and Incentives," Marketing Science (2006)
  8. ^ Santanen, E., Briggs, R. O., & de Vreede, G-J. (2004). Causal Relationships in Creative Problem Solving: Comparing Facilitation Interventions for Ideation. Journal of Management Information Systems. 20(4), 167-198.
  9. ^ Furnham, A., & Yazdanpanahi, T. (1995). Personality differences and group versus individual brainstorming. Personality and Individual Differences, 19, 73-80.
  10. ^ Questorming: An Outline of the Method, Jon Roland, 1985

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brainstorming"

Categories: Creativity | Product development | Market research | Problem
solving | Social psychology

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * VÃ¨neto
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 24 March 2009, at 19:23.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



