
# Creative class

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2008)  
The Creative Class is socioeconomic class (arguably constituting a distinct
social class) that economist and social scientist Dr. Richard Florida, a
professor and head of the Martin Prosperity Institute at the Rotman School of
Management at the University of Toronto, believes are a key driving force for
economic development of post-industrial cities in the USA.

Florida describes the 'Creative Class' as 40 million workers - 30 percent of
the U.S. workforce, and breaks the class into two broad sections, derived from
standard SOC codes data sets:

  * Super-Creative Core: This comprises about twelve percent of all U.S. jobs. This group is deemed to contain a wide range of occupations (e.g. science, engineering, education, computer programming, research) with arts, design, and media workers making a small subset. Those belonging to this group are considered to âfully engage in the creative processâ (Florida, 2002, p.69). The Super-Creative Core is considered innovative, creating commercial products and consumer goods. Their primary job function is to be creative and innovative. âAlong with problem solving, their work may entail problem findingâ (Florida, 2002, p.69).
  * Creative Professionals: These professionals are the classic knowledge-based workers and include those working in healthcare, business and finance, the legal sector, and education. They âdraw on complex bodies of knowledge to solve specific problemsâ using higher degrees of education to do so (2002).

Additional to these two main groups of creative people, the usually much
smaller group of Bohemians are also included in the creative class.

Florida concludes that the creative class is the core force of economic growth
in our future economy, and is expected to add more than 10 million jobs in the
next decade.

## Contents

  * 1 Background
  * 2 Creative class occupations
  * 3 The Creative Class and the global economy
  * 4 Places of high creative class populations
  * 5 Lifestyle
  * 6 Criticisms
  * 7 See also
  * 8 External links
  * 9 References
    * 9.1 Web References

  
## [edit] Background

The social theories advanced by Florida have sparked much debate and
discussion. Florida's work proposes that a new or emergent class, or
demographic segment made up of knowledge workers, intellectuals and various
types of artists is an ascendant economic force, representing either a major
shift away from traditional agriculture- or industry-based economies, or a
general restructuring into more complex economic hierarchies.

The theses developed by Florida in various publications were drawn from -
among other sources - US Census Bureau demographic data, focusing upon
economic trends and shifts apparent in (at first) major US cities, with later
work expanding the focus internationally.

The nebulous Creative Class has been on the rise for at least four decades;
with an economic shift towards technology, research and development, and the
internet (and related fields) building within the overall postwar economies of
many countries.

A number of specific cities and regions (California's Silicon Valley,
Bostonâs Route 128, The Triangle in North Carolina, Austin, Seattle,
Bangalore, India, Dublin, Ireland and Sweden) have come to be identified with
these economic trends; in Florida's publications, the same cities are also
heavily associated with the "Creative Class."

The Creative Class is relevant to our society because of their ability to
create and increase economic outcomes in the form of new ideas, new high tech
businesses and regional growth (2002).

## [edit] Creative class occupations

The Creative Class is a class of workers whose job is to create meaningful new
forms (2002). The Creative Class is composed of scientists and engineers,
university professors, poets and architects. The Creative Class also
âincludes people in design, education, arts, music and entertainment, whose
economic function is to create new ideas, new technology and/or creative
contentâ (Florida, 2006, p.8). Their designs are widely transferable and
useful on a broad scale, as with products that are sold and used on a wide
scale. Another sector of the Creative Class includes those positions which are
knowledge intensive, these careers usually require a high degree of formal
education (2002). Examples of this sector are health professionals and
business management, who are considered to be a part of the sub-group called
Creative Professionals. Their main job is to think and to create new standard
approaches for fixing the problem at hand. Creativity is becoming more valued
in todayâs global society. Employers look at creativity as a channel for
self expression and job satisfaction in their employees. About 38.3 million
Americans and 30 per cent of the workforce in America identify themselves with
the creative class. This number has increased more than 10 per cent in the
past 20 years. In short, they are shaping a new culture for the America of the
21st century.

The Creative Class is also known for its departure from traditional workplace
attire and behavior. Members of the Creative Class are starting to set their
own hours and dress codes in the work place, often reverting to more relaxed,
casual attire instead business suits and ties. People of the Creative Class
are working for themselves and setting their own hours, no longer sticking to
the 9-5 standard. Independence is also highly regarded among the members of
the Creative Class and expected in the work place (2002).

## [edit] The Creative Class and the global economy

The Creative Class is not a class of workers among many but in reality it is
the class that will bring any country who has them to great economic power and
growth. The main advantage to a creative class is that it creates outcomes in
new ideas, high-tech industry and regional growth. Even though the Creative
Class has been around for centuries, the U.S. was the first large country to
have this Creative Class that deals with information technology in the 1960s
and 1970s. In the 1960s less than five percent of the U.S. population was part
of the creative class which is now 26 per cent. Seeing that having a strong
Creative Class is vital in todayâs global economy, Europe is now almost
equal with America's numbers for this class. Competition has developed as to
who can attract the creative class to their cities.

## [edit] Places of high creative class populations

Florida's research of census and economic data, presented in works such as The
Rise of the Creative Class (2002), Cities and the Creative Class (2004), and
The Flight of the Creative Class (2007), as well as Bobos in Paradise, by
David Brooks (whose "bobos" roughly correspond to Florida's Creative Class),
and NEO Power by Ross Honeywill that introduces the NEO Neighborhood, have
shown that cities which attract and retain the Creative Class prosper, while
those that do not stagnate. This research has been gaining more and more
traction among members of the business community, as well as among politicians
and urban planners. For instance, Florida and other Creative Class theorists
have been invited to meetings of the National Conference of Mayors and
numerous economic development committees, such the Denver mayor's Task Force
on Creative Spaces and Michigan governor Jennifer Granholm's "Cool Cities"
initiative.

In Cities and the Creative Class, Florida devoted several chapters to a
discussion of the three main prerequisites of creative citiesâthough there
are many additional qualities which distinguish creative magnets. Basically,
for a city to become a magnet for the Creative Class, it must be an example of
"the three 'T's" of Talent (have a highly talented/educated/skilled
population), Tolerance (have a diverse community, which has a 'live and let
live' ethos), and Technology (have the technological infrastructure necessary
to fuel an entrepreneurial culture). In Rise of the Creative Class", Florida
also points out the fact that members of the Creative Class value meritocracy,
diversity and individuatlity and look for these characteristics when they
relocate (2002).

As Florida demonstrated in his books, cities like Buffalo, New Orleans and
Louisville are examples of cities which have tried to attract the Creative
Class but, in comparison to cities which better exemplify the "three 'T's",
have failed. The Creative Class is looking for cities that better accommodate
their cultural, creative, and technological needsâcities such as Chapel
Hill, San Francisco, Washington, D.C., Austin, Seattle, Toronto, Ontario and
Portland, Oregon. Florida also notes that Milwaukee, Wisconsin has all of the
ingredients to be a "leading city in a new economy".

The âCreativity Indexâ is another tool that Florida uses to describe how
members of the Creative Class are attracted to a city. The Creativity Index
looks at four elements; âthe Creative Class share of the workforce;
innovation, measured as patents per capita; high tech industry, using the
Milken Institutes widely accepted Tech Pole Indexâ¦;and diversity, measured
by the Gay Index, a reasonable proxy for an areaâs opennessâ¦(2002,
p.244-5).â Using this index, the cities listed above can be rated and ranked
in terms of innovative high tech centers, with San Francisco being the highest
ranked (2002).

Florida and others have found a strong correlation between those cities and
states which provide a more tolerant atmosphere toward culturally-
unconventional people such as gays, artists, and musicians (exemplified by
Florida's "Gay Index" and "Bohemian Index" developed in The Rise of the
Creative Class), and the numbers of Creative Class workers that live and move
there (2002).

Research involving the preferences and values of this new socio-economic class
has shown that where people choose to live can no longer be predicted
according to old Industrial Age models (such as "people will go to where the
jobs/factories are"). Sociologists and Urban Studies theorists for example
have noted that a gradual, and broad shift of values over the past decade.
Creative workers are looking for cultural, social, and technological
amenities/climates in which they feel they can best "be themselves".

## [edit] Lifestyle

The diverse and individualistic lifestyles that the Creative Class enjoys
involves active participation and experiential activies that are
multidimensional. Florida (2002) uses the term Street Level Culture to define
the kinds of stimulation that the Creative Class enjoys. Street Level Culture
is considered as a âteeming blend of cafes, sidewalk musicians, and small
galleries and bistros, where it is hard to draw the line between participant
and observer, or between creativity and its creatorsâ (p.166). Members of
the Creative Class enjoy unique experiences like traveling and antique
shopping, and they would rather be a participant rather than a spectator,
participating in outdoor activities like bike riding and running (2002).

## [edit] Criticisms

There are numerous studies that find fault with the logic or empirical claims
of the Creative Class. Hoyman and Faricy (2009), using Richard Floridaâs own
measure, find no statistical evidence that cities with higher proportions of
Creative Class workers correlated with any type of economic growth from
1990-2004. In "Urban Development and the Politics of the Creative Class", Ann
Markusen (2006) argues that workers qualified as being in the Creative Class
have no concept of group identity nor are they in occupations that are
inherently creative. Markusen also notes that the Creative Class is highly
based on educational attainment feeling that Floridaâs indices become
insignificant once educational attainment is added into his data (p.1923).
Jamie Peck (2005), "Struggling with the Creative Class" says that the Creative
Class theory offers no casual mechanism and suffers from circular logic.Along
with these criticisms, John Montgomery (2005), feels that âwhat Florida has
devised is a set of indices which simply mirror more fundamental truths about
creative milieux or dynamic citiesâ (p.339). meaning that, the Creative
Class isn't necessarily a class of people, but a diverse and creative
place/area which fosters creativity, culture and innovation. Montgomery also
disagrees with the citites that Florida heralds as most creative, stating that
London should be one of the top in the U.K. not Manchester and Leicester.
These arguments arise using Floridaâs own indices.

## [edit] See also

  * Netocracy
  * Thought leader
  * Cognitive elite

## [edit] External links

  * CreativeClass.com
  * Fennville: A Haven for the Creative Class \- An article about the city of Fennville, Mich., which is an example of a city being transformed by the "creative class."
  * Creative Class Codes \- County-level measures of creative class from USDA's Economic Research Service.
  * [1]\- Florida Praises Milwaukee - onMilwaukee.com
  * Creative Montessori School - Georgia

## [edit] References

  * On the Poverty of Experts: Between Academization and Deprofessionalization. Hartmann, Heinz, Hartmann, Marianne. 1982, vol 34, iss 2, pg 193
  * Florida, R. (2002). The Rise of the Creative Class: And How itâs transforming

work, leisure, community and everyday life. New York: Perseus Book Group

  * Fussell, Paul. Class, especially chapter titled "Class X". 1983.
  * Hoyman, Michele and Christopher Faricy. 2009. "It Takes a Village: A Test of the Creative Class, Social Capital and Human Capital Theories", Urban Affairs Review, 44:311-333.
  * Markusen, A. 2006. Urban development and the politics of the creative class:

Evidence from the study of artists. Environment and Planning A, 38 (1):
1921-1940.

  * Montgomery, J. (2005). Beware âthe Creative Classâ. Creativity and Wealth Creation Revisited. Local Economy, Vol. 20, No. 4, 337â343, November 2005
  * Peck, J. 2005. Struggling with the creative class. International Journal of Urban and

Regional Research 29 (4): 740-770.

  * Ray, Paul H. and Sherry Ruth Anderson. The Cultural Creative. New York: Three Rivers Press, 2000
  * Scott, Allen J. âCreative Cities: Conceptual Issues and Policy Questions,â Journal of Urban Affairs, 28, 2006, 1 â 17.

### [edit] Web References

  * Cleveland, Harlan. âAfter Affluence, What?â. October 1977. Aspen Instit Humanistic Studies November 3, 2005. [2]
  * Saenz, Tara Keniry. âPortraits of U.S. High-Technology Metros: Income Stratification of Occupational Groups from 1980-2000â. March 2005. U Texas, Austin November 31, 2005. [3]

v â¢ d â¢ e

Social stratification: Social class  
Bourgeoisie Upper class Ruling class Nobility White-collar  
Petite bourgeoisie Upper middle class Creative class Gentry Blue-collar  
Proletariat Middle class Slave class Nouveau riche/Parvenu Grey-collar  
Lumpenproletariat Lower middle class Lower middle classes Old Money Gold-
collar  
Peasant/Serf Working class Underclass Lower class Pink-collar  
Classlessness Green-collar  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Creative_class"

Categories: Cultural economics | Urban economics

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 06:36.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



