
# UV mapping

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

A checkered sphere, without and with UV mapping.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A representation of the UV mapping of a cube. The flattened cube net may then
be textured to texture the cube.

UV mapping is a 3D modeling process of making a 2D image representing a 3D
model. The map transforms the 3D object onto an image known as a texture. In
contrast to "X", "Y" and "Z", which are the coordinates for the original 3D
object in the modeling space, "U" and "V" are the coordinates of the
transformed object. This creates the effect of painting the image onto the
surface of the 3D object.

In the example to the right, a sphere is given a checkered texture, first
without and then with UV mapping. Without UV mapping, the checkers tile XYZ
space and the sphere is carved out of them. With UV mapping, the checkers tile
UV space and points on the sphere map to this space according to their
latitude and longitude.

When a model is created as a polygon mesh using a 3D modeler, UV coordinates
can be generated for each vertex in the mesh. One way is for the 3D modeler to
unfold the triangle mesh at the seams, automatically laying out the triangles
on a flat page. If the mesh is a UV sphere, for example, the modeler might
transform it into a equirectangular projection. Once the model is unwrapped,
the artist can paint a texture on each triangle individually, using the
unwrapped mesh as a template. When the scene is rendered, each triangle will
map to the appropriate texture from the "decal sheet".

A UV map can either be generated automatically by the software application,
made manually by the artist, or some combination of both. Often a UV map will
be generated, and then the artist will adjust and optimize it to minimize
seams and overlaps. If the model is symmetric, the artist might overlap
opposite triangles to allow painting both sides simultaneously.

It is important to note that UV coordinates are applied per face, not per
vertex. This means a shared vertex can have different UV coordinates in each
of its triangles, so adjacent triangles can be cut apart and positioned on
different areas of the texture map.

## [edit] Finding UV on a sphere

UV coordinates represent the projection of the unit spacevector onto the xy-
plane.

    u = \\sin\\theta\\cos\\phi = \\frac{x}{\\sqrt{x^2+y^2+z^2}}
  

    v = \\sin\\theta\\sin\\phi = \\frac{y}{\\sqrt{x^2+y^2+z^2}}
## [edit] See also

  * UVW mapping
  * NURBS
  * Polygon mesh
  * Sculpted prim
  * Least squares conformal map

## [edit] External links

  * LSCM Mapping image with Blender

<IMG> This computer graphics-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia
by expanding it.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UV_mapping"

Categories: Computer graphics stubs | 3D computer graphics

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Nederlands
  * à¹à¸à¸¢

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 December 2008, at 18:49 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



