
# Operations management

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Operations management is an area of business concerned with the production of
quality goods and services, and involves the responsibility of ensuring that
business operations are efficient and effective. It is the management of
resources, the distribution of goods and services to customers.

Operations also refers to the production of goods and services, the set of
value-added activities that transform inputs into many outputs.[1]
Fundamentally, these value-adding creative activities should be aligned with
market opportunity (see Marketing) for optimal enterprise performance.

## Contents

  * 1 Origins
  * 2 Operations management planning criteria
  * 3 Organizations
  * 4 References

  
## [edit] Origins

The origins of operations management can be traced back to the Industrial
Revolution, the same as scientific management and operations research. Adam
Smith treats the topic of the division of labor when opening his 1776 book: An
Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations also commonly
known as The Wealth of Nations. The first documented effort to solve operation
management issues comes from Eli Whitney in 1798, leading to the birth of the
American System of Manufacturers (ASM) by the mid-1800s. It was not until the
late 1950s that scholars noted the importance of viewing production operations
as systems.[2] [3]

Historically, the body of knowledge stemming from industrial engineering
formed the basis of the first MBA programs, and is central to operations
management as used across diverse business sectors, industry, consulting and
non-profit organizations.[citation needed]

## [edit] Operations management planning criteria

The task of production and operations management is to manage the efforts and
activities of people, capital and equipment resources in changing raw
materials into finished goods and services.

## [edit] Organizations

The following organizations support and promote operations management:

  * APICS The Association for Operations Management
  * Association for Professionals in Business Management (APBM)
  * Chartered Management Institute
  * European Operations Management Association (EurOMA) which supports the International Journal of Operations & Production Management
  * Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
  * Institute of operations management
  * Production and Operations Management Society (POMS)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Operations Management': in a week, Sean Naughton, (2002) Chartered Management Institute, ISBN 0-340-84966-5
  2. ^ An historical perspective on Operations Management, James M. Wilson, (1995) Production and Inventory Management Journal
  3. ^ Operations Management for Competitive Advantage, Richard Chase, F. Robert Jacobs, Nicholas Aquilano, et al., (2001), ISBN 0072506369

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operations_management"

Categories: Management

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since April 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Deutsch
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * SlovenÄina
  * à¹à¸à¸¢

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 11 April 2009, at 04:00 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



