
# Transformational leadership

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Transformational leadership is a leadership style that defines as leadership
that creates voluble and positive change in the followers. A transformational
leader focuses on "transforming" others to help each other, to look out for
each other, be encouraging, harmonious, and look out for the organization as a
whole. In this leadership, the leader enhances the motivation, moral and
performance of his follower group.

## Contents

  * 1 Background
  * 2 Development of concept
  * 3 Components of concept
  * 4 Research in the area
  * 5 Implications for managers
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Background

James MacGregor Burns (1978)[1] first introduced the concepts of
transformational in his descriptive research on political leaders, but this
term is now used in organizational psychology as well. According to Burns,
transformatial leadership is a process in which "leaders and followers make
each other to advance to a higher level of moral and motivation". Burns
related to the difficulty in differentiation between management and leadership
and claimed that the differences are in characteristics and behaviors. He
established two concepts: "transformational leadership" and "transactional
leadership". According to Burns, the transformational style creates
significant change in the life of people and organizations.It redesigns
perceptions and values, changes expectations and aspirations of employees.
Unlike in the transactional style, it is not based on a "give and take"
relationship, but on the leader's personality, traits and ability to make a
change through vision and goals.

## [edit] Development of concept

Another researcher, Bernard M. Bass (1985), suggested a transformational
leadership theory that adds to the initial concepts of Burn's (1978).[2] The
extent to which leader is transformational, is measured first, in terms of his
influence on the followers. The followers of such leader feels trust,
admiration, loyalty and respect to the leader and they are derived to do more
than they expected in the beginning. The leader transform and motivate
followers by charisma, intellectual arousal and individual consideration. In
addition, this leader seeks for new working ways, while he tries to identify
new opportunities versus threats and tries to get out of the status quo and
alter the environment.

The researchers, Bass & Avolio (1993), made an empirical study which mapped
the frequent leadership styles of managers and commanders. They located the
two categories (transformational and transactional leadership) on a continuum
and created more stages at the passage between those to leadership styles.
This model is called "The full range of leadership"[3].

## [edit] Components of concept

The full range of leadership introduces four elements of a transformational
leader:

1\. Individualized consideration\- the degree to which the leader attends to
each follower's needs, acts as a mentor or coach to the follower and listens
to the follower's concerns and needs. The leader gives empathy and support,
keeps on open communication and place challenges to the followers. This also
encompasses the need to respect and celebrate the individual contribution that
each follower can make to the team. The followers have a will and aspirations
for self development and have an intrinsic motivation for their tasks.

2\. Intellectual stimulation-The degree to which the leader challenges
assumptions, takes risks and solicits followers' ideas. Leaders with this
trait stimulate and encourage creativity in their followers. they nurture and
develop people who think independently. For such leader Learning is a value
and un expected satiations are seen as opportunities to learn.The followers
ask questions, think deeply about things and figure on better ways to execute
their tasks.

3\. Inspirational motivation\- the degree to which the leader articulates a
vision that is appealing and inspiring to followers. Leaders with
inspirational motivation challenge followers with high standards, communicate
optimism about future goals, and provide meaning for the task at hand.
Followers need to have a strong sense of purpose if they are to be motivated
to act. Purpose and meaning provide the energy that drives a group forward.

The visionary aspect of leadership are supported by communication skills that
makes it precises and powerful. The followers are willing to invest more
effort in their tasks, they are encouraged and optimistic about the future and
believe in their abilities.

4\. Role and identification model â the highest level of transformatial
leadership. The leader provides communal design of vision and purpose, values
and norms that gives meaning to the work. The leader plants pride and feelings
of mission within the stakeholders, enhancing their performance capabilities
and providing personal example. The followers trust and emulate this leader,
identifying with the goals. They internalize the attitudes and goals and act
in this "spirit" even when the leader is not around.

## [edit] Research in the area

When researching this construct, the MLQ questionnaire is used. This is a
multifactor leadership questionnaire that measures deferent factors of
tranformatial and transactional leadership (Bass, 1985). The scales in the
questionnaire are based on a initial factor analysis and latter versions.

The preliminary research of transformatial leadership was limited, because the
knowledge in this area was to primitive in order to find good examples for the
items in the questionnaire.

Another weakness in the first versions of the MLQ relates to the wording of
items. Most items in the scale of charismatic and intellectual arousals
described the result of leadership, instead of specific actions of the leader'
that can be observed that, in turn, bring to the results.

In response to the critics, Bass and his colleagues(1990) included in the
revised version many more items that describe leadership actions that are
observed directly.

## [edit] Implications for managers

The researcher Yukl (1994) draws some tips for transformational leadership[4]:

1\. Develop a challenging and attractive vision, together with the employees.

2\. Hook the vision with the strategy for its achieving.

3\. Develop the vision, specify and translate it to actions.

4\. Express confidence, decisiveness and optimism about the vision and its
implement.

5\. Realise the vision through small planed steps and small successes in the
path for its full implementation.

## [edit] See also

  * Agentic Leadership
  * Communal Leadership
  * Leadership

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Burns, J.M, (1978), Leadership, N.Y, Harper and Raw.
  2. ^ Bass,B. M,(1985), Leadership and Performance, N. Y,Free Press.
  3. ^ Bass, B, M., Avolio J. B, (1993), "Transformational leadership and organizational culture", Public Administration Quarterly, Spring,112-121.
  4. ^ Yukl, G.(1999). An evaluation of conceptual weaknesses in transformational and charismatic leadership theories. Leadership Quarterly, 10,285-305

  * Roesner, J. (1990). Ways women lead. Harvard Business Review. November - December.
  * Kotlyar, I. & Karakowsky, L. (2006). Leading Conflict? Linkages Between Leader Behaviors and Group Conflict. Small Group Research, Vol. 37, No. 4, 377-403
  * Kotlyar, I., & Karakowsky, L. (2007). Falling Over Ourselves to Follow the Leader. Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies, Vol. 14, No. 1, 38-49
  * Albritton, R. L. (1998). A new paradigm of leader effectiveness for academic libraries: An empirical study of the Bass (1985) model of transformational leadership. In T.F. Mech & G.B. McCabe (Eds.), Leadership and academic librarians (pp. 66â82) . Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1998.
  * Bass, B. M. (1998). Transformational leadership: Industrial, military, and educational impact. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
  * Bass, B.M. & Avolio, B.J. (Eds.). (1994). Improving organizational effectiveness through transformational leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
  * Burns, J.M. (1978) Leadership. New York. Harper & Row.
  * Pielstick, C.D. (1998). The transforming leader: A meta-ethnographic analysis. Community College Review, 26(3), 15-34.
  * Alimo-Metcalfe, B. & Alban-Metcalfe, J. (2001). âThe development of a new Transformational Leadership

Questionnaireâ. The Journal of Occupational & Organisational Psychology, 74,
1-27

## [edit] External links

  * [1] Tips for transformatial leader

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transformational_leadership"

Categories: Psychology | Organizational psychology | Leadership

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * SlovenÄina

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 April 2009, at 18:35 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



