# Technical communication

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Technical communication is the process of conveying technical information
through writing, speech, and other mediums to a specific audience. Information
is usable if the intended audience can perform an action or make a decision
based on it (Johnson-Sheehan 7). Technical communicators often work
collaboratively to create products (deliverables) for various media, including
paper, video, and the Internet. Deliverables include online help user manuals,
technical manuals, specifications, process and procedure manuals, reference
cards, training, business papers and reports.

Technical domains can be of any kind, including the soft and hard sciences,
high technology including computers and software, consumer electronics, and
business processes and practices.

Technical communication jobs include the following:

  * Technical writer
  * Technical editor
  * Technical illustrator
  * Information architect
  * Usability expert
  * User interface designer
  * User experience designer
  * Technical trainer
  * Technical translator

  

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Content creation
    * 2.1 Determining purpose and audience
    * 2.2 Collecting information
    * 2.3 Organizing and outlining information
    * 2.4 Writing the first draft
    * 2.5 Revising and editing
      * 2.5.1 Adjusting and reorganizing content
      * 2.5.2 Editing for style
      * 2.5.3 Editing for grammar
      * 2.5.4 Edit for context
  * 3 Controlled languages
  * 4 References
  * 5 Journals
  * 6 Associations
  * 7 See also
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] History

The origin of technical communication has been variously attributed to Ancient
Greece, The Renaissance, and the mid 20th Century. However, a clear trend
towards the professional field can be seen from the First World War on,
growing out of the need for technology-based documentation in the military,
manufacturing, electronic and aerospace industries. In 1953, two organizations
concerned with improving the practice of technical communication were founded
on the East Coast of the United States: the Society of Technical Writers, and
the Association of Technical Writers and Editors. These organizations merged
in 1957 to form the Society of Technical Writers and Editors, a predecessor of
the current Society for Technical Communication (STC).

## [edit] Content creation

Technical communication is sometimes considered a professional task for which
organizations either hire specialized employees, or outsource their needs to
communication firms. For example, a professional writer may work with a
company to produce a user manual. Other times, technical communication is
regarded as a responsibility that technical professionals employ on a daily
basis as they work to convey technical information to coworkers and clients.
For example, a computer scientist may need to provide software documentation
to fellow programmers or clients.

The process of developing information products in technical communication
begins by ensuring that the nature of the audience and their need for
information is clearly identified. From there the technical communicator
researches and structures the content into a framework that can guide the
detailed development. As the information product is created, the paramount
goal is ensuring that the content can be clearly understood by the intended
audience and provides the information that the audience needs in the most
appropriate format. This process, known as the 'Writing Process', has been a
central focus of writing theory since the 1970s, and some contemporary
textbook authors have applied it to technical communication.

Technical communication is important to engineers mainly for the purpose of
being professional and accurate. These reports supply specific information in
a concise manner and are very clear in their meaning if done correctly.

The technical writing process can be divided into five steps:

  1. Determine purpose and audience
  2. Collect information
  3. Organize and outline information
  4. Write the first draft
  5. Revise and edit

### [edit] Determining purpose and audience

All technical communication is done with a particular end in mind. The purpose
is usually to facilitate the communication of ideas and concepts to the
audience, but may sometimes be used to direct the audience in a particular
course of action. The importance of the audience is in the notion that meaning
is derived from the audience's interpretation of a piece of work. The purpose
may be something as simple as having the audience understand the details of
some technological system, or to take a particular action using that system.
For example, if the workers in a bank were not properly posting deposits to
accounts, someone would write the procedure so these workers might have the
correct procedure. Similarly, a sales manager might wonder which of two sites
would be a more appropriate choice for a new store, so he would ask someone to
study the market and write a report with the recommendations. The sales
manager would distribute the report to all parties involved in making that
decision. In each of these instances, the person who is writing is
transferring knowledge from the person who knows to the person who needs to
know. This is the basic definition of technical communication.

The most commonly used form of technical communication is technical writing.
Examples of technical writing include: project proposals, persuasive memos,
technical manuals, and users' guides. Such materials should typically present
an (informal) argument and be written diplomatically. A user's guide for an
electronic device typically includes diagrams along with detailed textual
explanations. The purpose should serve as a goal that the writer strives
toward in writing.

The identification of the audience affects many aspects of communication, from
word selection and graphics usage to style and organization. A non-technical
audience might not understand, or worse yet, even read a document that is
heavy with jargon, while a technical audience might crave extra detail because
it is critical for their work. Busy audiences do not have time to read an
entire document, so content must be organized for ease of searching, for
example by the frequent inclusion of headers, white space and other cues that
guide attention. Other requirements vary on the needs of the particular
audience.

Examples:

In Government:

Technical communication in the goverment is very particular and detailed.
Depending on the particular segment of the government (and not to mention the
particular country), the government component must follow distinct
specifications. In the case of the US Army, the MIL-spec (Military
specification) is used. It is updated continuously and technical
communications (in the form of Technical Manuals, Interactive Electronic
Technical Manuals, Technical Bulletins, etc.) must be updated as well.

The Department of Defense utilizes Technical Manuals regularly and is a core
part of the agency's responsibilities. Although detail oriented in their
requirements, the DoD has deficiencies in technical communication. The
following paper discusses those deficiencies and identifies the major
contributing factors.

Duffy, Thomas M.; and others. (1985). Technical Manual Production: An
Examination of Four Systems. CDC Technical Report No. 19. Carnegie- Mellon
University, Pittsburg, PA.
http://www.eric.ed.gov/ERICDocs/data/ericdocs2sql/content_storage_01/0000019b/80/2f/2c/63.pdf

### [edit] Collecting information

The next step is to collect information needed for accomplishing the stated
purpose. Information may be collected through primary research, where the
technical communicator conducts research first-hand, and secondary research,
where work published by another person is used as an information source. The
technical communicator must acknowledge all sources used to produce his or her
work. To ensure that this is done, the technical communicator should
distinguish quotations, paraphrases, and summaries when taking notes.

### [edit] Organizing and outlining information

Before writing the initial draft, all the ideas are organized in a way that
will make the document flow nicely. A good way of doing this is to write all
random thoughts down on a paper, and then circle all main sections, connect
the main sections to supporting ideas with lines, and delete all irrelevant
material.

Once each idea is organized, the writer can then organize the document as a
whole. This can be accomplished in various ways:

  * Chronological: This is used for documents that involve a linear process, such as a step-by-step guide describing how to accomplish something.
  * Parts of an object: Used for documents which describe the parts of an object, such as a graphic showing the parts of a computer (keyboard, monitor, mouse, etc.)
  * Simple to Complex (or vice versa): Starts with the easy-to-understand ideas, and gradually goes deeper into complex ideas.
  * Specific to General: Starts with many ideas, and then organizes the ideas into sub-categories.
  * General to Specific: Starts with a few categories of ideas, and then goes deeper.

Once the whole document is organized, it's a good idea to create a final
outline, which will show all the ideas in an easy-to-understand document.
Creating an outline makes the entire writing process much easier and will save
the author time.

### [edit] Writing the first draft

After the outline is completed, the next step is to write the first draft. The
goal is to write down ideas from the outline as quickly as possible. Setting
aside blocks of one hour or more, in a place free of distractions, will help
the writer maintain a flow. Also, the writer should wait until the draft is
complete to do any revising; stopping to revise at this stage will break the
writer's flow. The writer should start with the section that is easiest for
them, and write the summary only after the body is drafted.

The ABC (Abstract, Body, and Conclusion) format can be used when writing a
first draft. The Abstract describes the subject to be written about, so that
the reader knows what he or she is going to be told in the document. The Body
is the majority of the paper, in which the topics are covered in depth.
Lastly, the Conclusion section restates the main topics of the paper.

The ABC format can also be applied to individual paragraphs, beginning with a
topic sentence that clearly states the paragraph's topic. This is followed by
the topic, and finally, the paragraph closes with a concluding sentence.

### [edit] Revising and editing

Once the initial draft is laid out, editing and revising can be done to fine-
tune the draft into a final copy. Four tasks transform the early draft into
its final form, suggested by Pfeiffer and Boogard:

#### [edit] Adjusting and reorganizing content

During this step, the draft is revisited to 1) focus or elaborate on certain
topics which deserve more attention, 2) shorten other sections, and 3) shift
around certain paragraphs, sentences, or entire topics.

#### [edit] Editing for style

Good style makes the writing more interesting, appealing, or readable. Some
changes are made by choice, not for correctness, and may include:

  * shortening paragraphs
  * rearranging paragraphs
  * changing passive-voice sentences to an active voice
  * shortening sentences
  * defining terminology
  * adding headings, lists, graphics

#### [edit] Editing for grammar

At this point, the document can be checked for grammatical errors, such as
comma usage and common word confusions (for example, there/their/they're).

#### [edit] Edit for context

Determining the necessary amount of context is important. There needs to be a
balance between exuberance, which may lead the audience to take unintended
additional meaning from the text, and terseness, which may leave the audience
unable to interpret meaning because of lack of context.

## [edit] Controlled languages

In environments where readability and (automated) translatability are of
primary concern, authors may be using a controlled language, i.e. a subset of
natural languages whose grammars and dictionaries have been restricted. An
example of a widely used controlled language is Simplified English, which was
originally developed for aerospace industry maintenance manuals.

## [edit] References

Gerson, Sharon, and Steve Gerson. Technical Writing: Process and Product.
Columbus, OH: Pearson, 2007.

April Rose Arviola, Richard. Technical Communication Today. New York:
Pearson/Longman, 2006.

Pfeiffer, William S. and Jan Boogerd. Technical Writing: A Practical Approach.
4th Canadian Edition. Scarborough: Prentice Hall, 2007.

Scott, Blake, Longo, Bernadette, and Katherine V. Wills. Critical Power Tools.
Albany: Suny, 2006.

## [edit] Journals

  * IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication

The IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication is a refereed quarterly
journal published since 1957 by the Professional Communication Society of the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). The readers
represent engineers, technical communicators, scientists, information
designers, editors, linguists, translators, managers, business professionals
and others from around the globe who work as scholars, educators, and/or
practitioners. The readers share a common interest in effective communication
in technical workplace and academic contexts.

The journal's research falls into three main categories: (1) the communication
practices of technical professionals, such as engineers and scientists, (2)
the practices of professional communicators who work in technical or business
environments, and (3) research-based methods for teaching professional
communication.

  * Journal of Business and Technical Communication

  * Journal of Technical Writing and Communication

  * Technical Communication

  * Technical Communication Quarterly

  * Business Communication Quarterly

  * Journal of Business Communication

## [edit] Associations

  * Institute of Scientific and Technical Communicators (UK) [1]
  * Society for Technical Communication [2]
  * Association for Business Communication (ABC) [3]
  * Association of Teachers of Technical Writing
  * Council for Programs in Technical and Scientific Communication
  * IEEE Professional Communication Society
  * Technical Communicators Association of New Zealand
  * Tekom (pages available in English) Professional organization for technical communication, Germany
  * Elephant (pages available in English) Professional organization for Technical Writers, Israel
  * FTI (in Swedish) Professional organization for Technical Writers, Sweden
  * STIC (in Dutch) Professional organization for Techniscal Communicators, The Netherlands

## [edit] See also

  * Communication studies
  * Technical communication tools
  * Information_graphics
  * Professional communication
  * API Writer
  * Technical communication (Forums)

## [edit] External links

  * Tydings Document Solutions, LLC (teacher resources and online Technical Communication Courses)
  * Technical Communicator's Glossary\- Anica Jovanova and John Salt for the IEEE Professional Communication Society
  * KnowGenesis - International Journal for Technical Communication
  * Bangalore Technical Writers Meetup portal (requires a signup
  * Docsymmetry
  * KeyContent.org
  * TECHWR-L, The Internet Forum for Technical Communication
  * MITWA (Mentors, Indexers, Technical Writers & Associates) Online resource for Professional Technical Communicators
  * TechCommPros (online resource and email list for Professional Technical Communicators)
  * A theory of presentation and its implications for the design of online technical documentation Looks at technical communication and the role of off- as well as online documents in a problem-solving context (service engineering department)
  * Technical Communication & Technical Writers in Russia
  * Wikiversity Technical Writing course
  * DITA Users \- a member organization helping tech communicators get started with topic-based structured writing.
  * Technical Communicators: What's in a Name?
  * TWIN Portal: Technical Writers of India
  * An Expert in Technical Writing is a discussion forum technical writers to help each other widen their technical horizons.
  * Standard for technical writers from ISO Contact page for International Standards Organization working group for technical documentation standards

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technical_communication"

Categories: Technical communication | Communication design | Visualization
(graphic)

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * æ¥æ¬èª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 16 May 2009, at 15:01 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



