
# Fixed income

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (July 2008)  
Financial markets  
Bond market  
Fixed income  
Corporate bond  
Government bond  
Municipal bond  
Bond valuation  
High-yield debt  
  
Stock market  
Stock  
Preferred stock  
Common stock  
Registered share  
Voting share  
Stock exchange  
  
Foreign exchange market  
  
Derivatives market  
Credit derivative  
Hybrid security  
Options  
Futures  
Forwards  
Swaps  
  
Other Markets  
Commodity market  
Money market  
OTC market  
Real estate market  
Spot market  

* * *  
Finance series  
Financial market  
Financial market participants  
Corporate finance  
Personal finance  
Public finance  
Banks and Banking  
Financial regulation  
  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
Fixed income refers to any type of investment that yields a regular (or fixed)
return.

For example, if you lend money to a borrower and the borrower has to pay
interest once a month, you have been issued a fixed-income security. When a
company does this, it is often called a bond or corporate bank debt (although
"preferred stock" is also sometimes considered to be fixed income). Sometimes
people misspeak when they talk about fixed income. Bonds actually have higher
risk, while notes and bills have less risk because these are issued by
government agencies.

The term fixed income is also applied to a person's income that does not vary
with each period. This can include income derived from fixed-income
investments such as bonds and preferred stocks or pensions that guarantee a
fixed income. When pensioners or retirees are dependent on their pension as
their dominant source of income, the term "fixed income" can also carry the
implication that they have relatively limited discretionary income or have
little financial freedom to make large expenditures.

Fixed-income securities can be contrasted with variable return securities such
as stocks. To understand the difference between stocks and bonds, you have to
understand a company's motivation. A company wants to raise money, and it
doesn't want to wait until it has earned enough through ongoing operations
(selling products or providing services). In order for a company to grow as a
business, it often must raise money; to finance an acquisition, buy equipment
or land or invest in new product development. Investors will only give money
to the company if they believe that they will be given something in return
commensurate with the risk profile of the company. The company can either
pledge a part of itself, by giving equity in the company (stock), or the
company can give a promise to pay regular interest and repay principal on the
loan (bond or bank loan) or (preferred stock).

While a bond is simply a promise to pay interest on borrowed money, there is
some important terminology used by the fixed-income industry:

  * The issuer is the entity (company or govt.) who borrows an amount of money (issuing the bond) and pays the interest.
  * The principal (of a bond) is the amount that the issuer borrows.
  * The coupon (of a bond) is the interest that the issuer must pay.
  * The maturity is the end of the bond, the date that the issuer must return the principal.
  * The issue is another term for the bond itself.
  * The indenture is the contract that states all of the terms of the bond.

People who invest in fixed-income securities are typically looking for a
constant and secure return on their investment. For example, a retired person
might like to receive a regular dependable payment to live on, but not consume
principal. This person can buy a bond with their money, and use the coupon
payment (the interest) as that regular dependable payment. When the bond
matures or is refinanced, the person will have their money returned to them.

Interest rates change over time, based on a variety of factors, particularly
rates set by the Federal Reserve. For example, if a company wants to raise $1
million and not a lot of people in the market have free cash to lend, the
company will have to offer a high rate of interest (coupon) to get people to
buy their bond. If there are a lot of people in the market trying to get a
return on their money, the company can offer a lower coupon.

To complicate matters further, fixed income securities are actually traded on
the open market, just like stocks. To understand this, first realize that
bonds are usually created in round face values, for example $100,000. If the
current yield (interest rate) of newly issued similar bonds is 6% per year,
and you are buying a bond with a coupon rate below 6%, then you can get the
bond at a discount (below face value of $100,000), which brings your rate of
return on that bond to 6%. Similarly, if the coupon rate of the bond you are
buying is greater than 6% you will have to pay a premium for the bond to bring
the rate of return down to 6%.

There are also index-linked, fixed-income securities. The most common and an
example of the highest rated variety of this kind could include Treasury
Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS). This type of fixed income is adjusted
to the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (CPI-U), and then a real
yield is applied to the adjusted principal. This means that the US Treasury
issues fixed income that is backed by the full faith and credit of the US
government to outperform the CPI (e.g. to outperform the inflation rate). This
allows investors of all sizes to not lose the purchasing power of their money
due to inflation, which can be very uncertain at times. For example, assuming
3.88% inflation over the course of 1 year (just about the 56 year average
inflation rate, through most of 2006), and a real yield of 2.61% (the fixed US
Treasury real yield on October 19, 2006, for a 5 yr TIPS), the adjusted
principal of the fixed income would rise from 100 to 103.88 and then the real
yield would be applied to the adjusted principal, meaning 103.88 x 1.0261,
which equals 106.5913; giving a total return of 6.5913%. TIPS moderately
outperform conventional US Treasuries, which yield just 5.05% for a 1 yr bill
on October 19, 2006. By investing in such fixed income, index linked fixed
income securities, consumers can exceed the pace of inflation, and gain value
in real terms.

All fixed income securities from any entity have risks including but not
limited to:

  * inflationary risk
  * interest rate risk
  * currency risk
  * default risk
  * repayment of principal risk
  * reinvestment risk
  * liquidity risk
  * maturity risk
  * streaming income payment risk
  * duration risk
  * convexity risk
  * credit quality risk
  * political risk
  * tax adjustment risk
  * market risk
  * climate risk

## [edit] External links

  * Fixed income explained in clear terms

v â¢ d â¢ e

Bond market  
Bond Â· Debenture Â· Fixed income  
Types of bonds by issuer

Agency bond Â· Corporate bond (Senior debt, Subordinated debt) Â· Distressed
debt Â· Emerging market debt Â· Government bond Â· Municipal bond Â· Sovereign
bond  
Types of bonds by payout

Accrual bond Â· Auction rate security Â· Callable bond Â· Commercial paper Â·
Convertible bond Â· Exchangeable bond Â· Fixed rate bond Â· Floating rate note
Â· High-yield debt Â· Inflation-indexed bond Â· Inverse floating rate note Â·
Perpetual bond Â· Puttable bond Â· Reverse convertible Â· Zero-coupon bond  
Securitized Products

Asset-backed security Â· Collateralized debt obligation Â· Collateralized
mortgage obligation Â· Commercial mortgage-backed security Â· Mortgage-backed
security  
Commercial Mortgage Securities Association (CMSA) Â· International Capital
Market Association (ICMA) Â· Securities Industry and Financial Markets
Association (SIFMA)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fixed_income"

Categories: Fixed income market

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * à¹à¸à¸¢

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 19:30 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



