
# Forming-storming-norming-performing

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (April 2009)  
yo ho heres the info The Forming â Storming â Norming â Performing model
of group development was first proposed by Bruce Tuckman in 1965, who
maintained that these phases are all necessary and inevitable in order for the
team to grow, to face up to challenges, to tackle problems, to find solutions,
to plan work, and to deliver results. This model has become the basis for
subsequent models of Team development and team dynamics and a management
theory frequently used to describe the behavior of existing teams. It has also
taken a firm hold in the field of experiential education since in many outdoor
education centers team building and leadership development are key goals.

## Contents

  * 1 Forming
  * 2 Storming
  * 3 Norming
  * 4 Performing
  * 5 Further Developments
    * 5.1 Adjourning and Transforming
    * 5.2 Norming and Re-Norming
    * 5.3 Contribution to White-Fairhurst TPR Model
  * 6 References
    * 6.1 Footnotes

  
## [edit] Forming

In the first stages of team building, the forming of the team takes place. The
team meets and learns about the opportunity and challenges, and then agrees on
goals and begins to tackle the tasks. Team members tend to behave quite
independently. They may be motivated but are usually relatively uninformed of
the issues and objectives of the team. Team members are usually on their best
behavior but very focused on themselves. Mature team members begin to model
appropriate behavior even at this early phase. Sharing the knowledge of the
concept of "Teams - Forming, Storming, Norming, Performing" is extremely
helpful to the team.

Supervisors of the team tend to need to be directive during this phase.

The forming stage of any team is important because in this stage the members
of the team get to know one another and make new friends. This is also a good
opportunity to see how each member of the team works as an individual and how
they respond to pressure.

## [edit] Storming

Every group will then enter the storming stage in which different ideas
compete for consideration. The team addresses issues such as what problems
they are really supposed to solve, how they will function independently and
together and what leadership model they will accept. Team members open up to
each other and confront each other's ideas and perspectives. In some cases
storming can be resolved quickly. In others, the team never leaves this stage.
The maturity of some team members usually determines whether the team will
ever move out of this stage. Some team members will focus on minutiae to evade
real issues.

The storming stage is necessary to the growth of the team. It can be
contentious, unpleasant and even painful to members of the team who are averse
to conflict. Tolerance of each team member and their differences needs to be
emphasized. Without tolerance and patience the team will fail. This phase can
become destructive to the team and will lower motivation if allowed to get out
of control.

Supervisors of the team during this phase may be more accessible but tend to
still need to be directive in their guidance of decision-making and
professional behavior. The groups will therefore resolve their differences and
group members will be able to participate with one another more comfortably
and they won't feel that they are being judged in any way and will therefore
share their own opinions and views.

## [edit] Norming

At some point, the team may enter the norming stage. Team members adjust their
behavior to each other as they develop work habits that make teamwork seem
more natural and fluid. Team members often work through this stage by agreeing
on rules, values, professional behavior, shared methods, working tools and
even taboos. During this phase, team members begin to trust each other.
Motivation increases as the team gets more acquainted with the project.

Teams in this phase may lose their creativity if the norming behaviors become
too strong and begin to stifle healthy dissent and the team begins to exhibit
groupthink.

Supervisors of the team during this phase tend to be participative more than
in the earlier stages. The team members can be expected to take more
responsibility for making decisions and for their professional behavior.

Views seen before of members at the start begin to change as they know each
other better. The team feel a sense of achievement for getting so far, however
some can begin to feel threatened by the amount of responsibility they have
been given. They would try to resist the pressure and resist reverting to
storming again.

## [edit] Performing

Some teams will reach the performing stage. These high-performing teams are
able to function as a unit as they find ways to get the job done smoothly and
effectively without inappropriate conflict or the need for external
supervision. Team members have become interdependent. By this time they are
motivated and knowledgeable. The team members are now competent, autonomous
and able to handle the decision-making process without supervision. Dissent is
expected and allowed as long as it is channeled through means acceptable to
the team.

Supervisors of the team during this phase are almost always participative. The
team will make most of the necessary decisions. Even the most high-performing
teams will revert to earlier stages in certain circumstances. Many long-
standing teams will go through these cycles many times as they react to
changing circumstances. For example, a change in leadership may cause the team
to revert to storming as the new people challenge the existing norms and
dynamics of the team.

## [edit] Further Developments

### [edit] Adjourning and Transforming

Tuckman later added a fifth phase, adjourning, that involves completing the
task and breaking up the team. Others call it the phase for mourning.

A team that lasts may transcend to a transforming phase of achievement.
Transformational management can produce major changes in performance through
synergy and is considered to be more far-reaching than transactional
management.

### [edit] Norming and Re-Norming

Timothy Biggs suggested that an additional stage be added of Norming after
Forming and renaming the traditional Norming stage Re-Norming. This addition
is designed to reflect that there is a period after Forming where the
performance of a team gradually improves and the interference of a leader
content with that level of performance will prevent a team progressing through
the Storming stage to true performance. This puts the emphasis back on the
team and leader as the Storming stage must be actively engaged in to succeed
â too many 'diplomats' or 'peacemakers' especially in a leadership role may
prevent the team from reaching their full potential.

Rickards and Moger propose a similar extension to the Tuckman model when a
group breaks out of its norms through a process of creative problem-solving.
[1][2]

### [edit] Contribution to White-Fairhurst TPR Model

Alasdair A. K. White together with his colleague, John Fairhurst, examined
Tuckman's development sequence when developing the White-Fairhurst TPR Model
in which they simplify the sequence and group the Forming-Storming-Norming
stages together as the Transforming phase which they equate with the initial
performance level. This is then followed by a Performing phase that leads to a
new performance level which they call the Reforming phase. Their work was
developed further by White in his 2008 essay "From Comfort Zone to Performance
Management" [1] in which he demonstrates the linkage between Tuckman's work
with that of Colin Carnall's "coping cycle" and the Comfort Zone Theory.

## [edit] References

Tuckman, Bruce. "Developmental sequence in small groups". Psychological
Bulletin 63 (6): 384-99.
http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qa3954/is_200104/ai_n8943663. Retrieved
on 2008-11-10. "Reprinted with permission in Group Facilitation, Spring 2001".

White, Alasdair A. K. "From Comfort Zone to Performance Management" PM-
Solutions, 2008 [2]

### [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ Rickards, T., & Moger,S.T., (1999) Handbook for creative team leaders, Aldershot, Hants: Gower
  2. ^ Rickards, T., & Moger, S., (2000) âCreative leadership processes in project team development: An alternative to Tuckmanâs stage modelâ, British Journal of Management, Part 4, pp273-283

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forming-storming-norming-
performing"

Categories: Social groups | Group processes | Social work

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 22 April 2009, at 10:45 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



