
# Rochdale Principles

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The Rochdale Principles are a set of ideals for the operation of cooperatives.
They were first set out by the Rochdale Society of Equitable Pioneers in
Rochdale, England, in 1844, and have formed the basis for the principles on
which co-operatives around the world operate to this day. The implications of
the Rochdale Principles are a focus of study in co-operative economics. The
original Rochdale Principles were officially adopted by the International Co-
operative Alliance (ICA) in 1937 as the Rochdale Principles of Co-operation.
Updated versions of the principles were adopted by the ICA in 1966 as the Co-
operative Principles and in 1995 as part of the Statement on the Co-operative
Identity.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Current ICA version of co-operative principles (1995)
    * 1.1 Voluntary and open membership
      * 1.1.1 Anti-discrimination
      * 1.1.2 Motivations and rewards
    * 1.2 Democratic member control
    * 1.3 Member economic participation
      * 1.3.1 Democratic control
      * 1.3.2 Limitations on member compensation and appropriate use of surpluses
    * 1.4 Autonomy and independence
    * 1.5 Education, training, and information
    * 1.6 Cooperation among cooperatives
    * 1.7 Concern for community
  * 2 Previous versions
    * 2.1 Original version (1844)
    * 2.2 ICA revision (1966)
  * 3 References
  * 4 See also
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Current ICA version of co-operative principles (1995)

The Rochdale Principles according to the 1995 ICA revision are detailed
below.[2]

### [edit] Voluntary and open membership

The first of the Rochdale Principles states that co-operative societies must
have an open and voluntary membership. According to the ICA's Statement on the
Co-operative Identity, "Co-operatives are voluntary organisations, open to all
persons able to use their services and willing to accept the responsibilities
of membership, without gender, social, racial, political or religious
discrimination."

##### [edit] Anti-discrimination

To discriminate socially is to make a distinction between people on the basis
of class or category without regard to individual merit. Examples of social
discrimination include racial, religious, sexual, sexual orientation,
disability, and ethnic discrimination. To fulfill the first Rochdale
Principle, a Co-operative society should not prevent anyone willing to
participate from doing so on any of these grounds. However, this does not
prohibit the co-operative from setting ground rules for membership, such as
residing in a specific geographic area or payment of a membership fee to join,
so long as all persons meeting such criteria are able to participate if they
so choose.

##### [edit] Motivations and rewards

Given the voluntary nature of co-operatives, it requires a motivation to
encourage people to participate. Each person's motivations will be unique, and
will vary from one co-operative to another, but will often be a combination of
the following:

  * Financial \- Some co-operatives are able to provide members with financial benefits.
  * Quality of life â serving the community through a co-operative because doing service makes one's own life better - is perhaps the most significant motivation for volunteering. It is often mixed with a good dose of altruism. Included here would be the benefits people get from being with other people, staying active, and above all having a sense of the value of ourselves in society that may not be as clear in other areas of life.
  * Giving Back â many people have in some way benefited from the work of a co-operative, or more generally, and volunteer to give back.
  * Altruism â volunteering for the benefit of others. Most people argue that there are no purely altruistic volunteers â altruism is a common motivation but never the only motivation for sustained commitment to serve â there is always some aspect of personal gain or satisfaction
  * A sense of duty â some see participation in community as a responsibility that comes with citizenship â in this case they may not describe themselves as volunteers
  * Career Experience \- Volunteering offers experiences that can add to career prospects.

### [edit] Democratic member control

The second of the Rochdale Principles states that co-operative societies must
have democratic member control. According to the ICA's Statement on the Co-
operative Identity, âCo-operatives are democratic organisations controlled
by their members, who actively participate in setting their policies and
making decisions. Men and women serving as elected representatives are
accountable to the membership. In primary co-operatives members have equal
voting rights (one member, one vote) and co-operatives at other levels are
also organised in a democratic manner.â

### [edit] Member economic participation

Member economic participation is one of the defining features of co-operative
societies, and constitutes the third Rochdale Principle in the ICA's Statement
on the Co-operative Identity. According to the ICA, co-operatives are
enterprises in which âMembers contribute equitably to, and democratically
control, the capital of their co-operative. At least part of that capital is
usually the common property of the co-operative. Members usually receive
limited compensation, if any, on capital subscribed as a condition of
membership. Members allocate surpluses for any or all of the following
purposes: developing their co-operative, possibly by setting up reserves, part
of which at least would be indivisible; benefiting members in proportion to
their transactions with the co-operative; and supporting other activities
approved by the membership.â This principle, in turn, can be broken down
into a number of constituent parts.

##### [edit] Democratic control

The first part of this principle states that âMembers contribute equitably
to, and democratically control, the capital of their co-operative. At least
part of that capital is usually the common property of the co-operative.â
This enshrines democratic control over the co-operative, and how its capital
is used.

##### [edit] Limitations on member compensation and appropriate use of
surpluses

The second part of the principle deals with how members are compensated for
funds invested in a Co-operative, and how surpluses should be used. Unlike for
profit corporations, co-operatives are a form of social enterprise. Given
this, there are at least three purposes for which surplus funds can be used,
or distributed, by a Co-operative.

  * âMembers usually receive limited compensation, if any, on capital subscribed as a condition of membership.â
  * âDeveloping their co-operative, possibly by setting up reserves, part of which at least would be indivisible;â in other words, the surplus can be reinvested in the co-operative.
  * Benefiting members in proportion to their transactions with the co-operative;â for example, a Consumers' Co-operative may decide to pay dividends based on purchases (or a 'divvi').
  * âSupporting other activities approved by the membership.â

### [edit] Autonomy and independence

The fourth of the Rochdale Principles states that co-operative societies must
be autonomous and independent. According to the ICA's Statement on the Co-
operative Identity, âCo-operatives are autonomous, self-help organizations
controlled by their members. If they enter to agreements with other
organizations, including governments, or raise capital from external sources,
they do so on terms that ensure democratic control by their members and
maintain their co-operative autonomy.â

### [edit] Education, training, and information

The fifth of the Rochdale Principles states that co-operative societies must
provide education and training to their members and the public. According to
the ICA's Statement on the Co-operative Identity, âCo-operatives provide
education and training for their members, elected representatives, managers,
and employees so they can contribute effectively to the development of their
co-operatives. They inform the general public â particularly young people
and opinion leaders â about the nature and benefits of co-operation.â

### [edit] Cooperation among cooperatives

The sixth of the Rochdale Principles states that co-operatives cooperate with
each other. According to the ICA's Statement on the Co-operative Identity,
âCo-operatives serve their members most effectively and strengthen the co-
operative movement by working together through local, national, regional and
international structures.â

### [edit] Concern for community

The seventh of the Rochdale Principles states that co-operative societies must
have concern for their communities. According to the ICA's Statement on the
Co-operative Identity, âCo-operatives work for the sustainable development
of their communities through policies approved by their members.â

## [edit] Previous versions

### [edit] Original version (1844)

  1. Open membership.
  2. Democratic control (one person, one vote).
  3. Distribution of surplus in proportion to trade.
  4. Payment of limited interest on capital.
  5. Political and religious neutrality.
  6. Cash trading (no credit extended).
  7. Promotion of education.

### [edit] ICA revision (1966)

  1. Open, voluntary membership.
  2. Democratic governance.
  3. Limited return on equity.
  4. Surplus belongs to members.
  5. Education of members and public in cooperative principles.
  6. Cooperation between cooperatives.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ ICA Co-operative Principles, 1937, 1966, and 1995 revisions.
  2. ^ Statement on the Co-operative Identity, 1995 version.

## [edit] See also

  * Rochdale College (a Canadian experiment in Rochdale principles)
  * Rochdale, Queens, a cooperative housing project in New York.

## [edit] External links

  * The International Co-operative Alliance
  * Statement on the Co-operative Identity
  * Revisions to the Co-operative Principles
  * David Thompson (JulyâAugust 1994). "Cooperative Principles Then and Now". #53 (Co-operative Grocer). http://www.cooperativegrocer.coop/articles/index.php?id=158. Article for lay audience, tracing the early history of the Rochdale Pioneers and the Rochdale Principles.
  * Principles of the International Co-operative Alliance
  * A variant of the 1966 principles from Circle Pines Center

v â¢ d â¢ e

Cooperatives  
Types of cooperatives

Agricultural cooperative Â· Building cooperative Â· Credit union Â· Consumers'
cooperative Â· Cooperative banking Â· Cooperative federation Â· Cooperative
union Â· Cooperative wholesale society Â· Food cooperative Â· Housing
cooperative Â· Mutual insurance Â· Retailers' cooperative Â· Social
cooperative Â· Utility cooperative Â· Worker cooperative  
Identity

The Rochdale Principles Â· ICA Statement on the Cooperative Identity  
Political and economic theories

Cooperative federalism Â· Distributism Â· Owenism Â· Mutualism Â· Neo-
Capitalism Â· Socialism Â· Social enterprise Â· Socially responsible investing  
Key theorists

Robert Owen Â· William King Â· The Rochdale Pioneers Â· G. D. H. Cole Â·
Charles Gide Â· Beatrice Webb Â· Friedrich Raiffeisen Â· David Griffiths  
Organizations

List of cooperatives Â· List of cooperative federations Â· List of worker
cooperatives Â· International Co-operative Alliance Â· Co-operativesUK Â· Co-
operative Party  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rochdale_Principles"

Categories: Cooperative principles | Cooperatives | History of Rochdale | 1844
works | 1966 works | 1995 works

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Brezhoneg
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 January 2009, at 12:27 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



