
# Menger sponge

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Sponge (disambiguation).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Menger sponge

In mathematics, the Menger sponge is a fractal curve. It is the universal
curve, in that it has topological dimension one, and any other curve (more
precisely: any compact metric space of topological dimension 1) is
homeomorphic to some subset of it. It is sometimes called the Menger-
Sierpinski sponge or the Sierpinski sponge. It is a three-dimensional
extension of the Cantor set and Sierpinski carpet. It was first described by
Austrian mathematician Karl Menger in 1926 while exploring the concept of
topological dimension.

## Contents

  * 1 Construction
  * 2 Properties
  * 3 Formal definition
  * 4 In film
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Construction

Construction of a Menger sponge can be visualized as follows:

  1. Begin with a cube. (first image)
  2. Divide every face of the cube into 9 squares. This will sub-divide the cube into 27 smaller cubes, like a Rubik's Cube
  3. Remove the cube at the middle of every face, and remove the cube in the center, leaving 20 cubes (second image). This is a Level 1 Menger sponge.
  4. Repeat steps 1-3 for each of the remaining smaller cubes.

The second repetition will give you a Level 2 sponge (third image), the third
a Level 3 sponge (fourth image), and so on. The Menger sponge itself is the
limit of this process after an infinite number of iterations.

Menger sponge, first three levels of the construction.

The number of cubes is 20n, with n being the number of iterations performed on
the first cube:

Iters Cubes  
0 1  
1 20  
2 400  
3 8,000  
4 160,000  
5 3,200,000  
6 64,000,000  
At the first level, no iterations are performed, (200 = 1).

## [edit] Properties

<IMG>

<IMG>

An illustration of M4, the fourth iteration of the construction process

Each face of the Menger sponge is a Sierpinski carpet; furthermore, any
intersection of the Menger sponge with a diagonal or medium of the initial
cube M0 is a Cantor set.

The Menger sponge is a closed set; since it is also bounded, the Heine-Borel
theorem implies that it is compact. Furthermore, the Menger sponge is
uncountable and has Lebesgue measure 0.

The topological dimension of the Menger sponge is one, the same as any curve.
Menger showed, in the 1926 construction, that the sponge is a universal curve,
in that any possible one-dimensional curve is homeomorphic to a subset of the
Menger sponge, where here a curve means any compact metric space of Lebesgue
covering dimension one; this includes trees and graphs with an arbitrary
countable number of edges, vertices and closed loops, connected in arbitrary
ways.

In a similar way, the Sierpinski carpet is a universal curve for all curves
that can be drawn on the two-dimensional plane. The Menger sponge constructed
in three dimensions extends this idea to graphs that are not planar, and might
be embedded in any number of dimensions. Thus any geometry of quantum loop
gravity can be embedded in a Menger sponge.

Interestingly, the Menger sponge simultaneously exhibits an infinite surface
area and encloses zero volume.

The sponge has a Hausdorff dimension of (log 20) / (log 3) (approx. 2.726833).  

## [edit] Formal definition

Formally, a Menger sponge can be defined as follows:

    M := \\bigcap_{n\\in\\mathbb{N}} M_n
where M0 is the unit cube and

    M_{n+1} := \\left\\{\\begin{matrix}
\(x,y,z\)\\in\\mathbb{R}^3: &

\\begin{matrix}\\exists i,j,k\\in\\{0,1,2\\}: \(3x-i,3y-j,3z-k\)\\in M_n

\\\\ \\mbox{and at most one of }i,j,k\\mbox{ is equal to 1}\\end{matrix}

\\end{matrix}\\right\\}.

## [edit] In film

A fictitious version of the Menger Sponge that appeared to have the abilities
of controlling the effects of gravity on oneself and capturing ghosts (among
other properties) was featured in the 2006 Taiwanese film Gui si (Silk)

## [edit] See also

  * List of fractals by Hausdorff dimension
  * Sierpinski triangle
  * Sierpinski tetrahedron
  * Koch snowflake

## [edit] References

  * Karl Menger, General Spaces and Cartesian Spaces, (1926) Communications to the Amsterdam Academy of Sciences. English translation reprinted in Classics on Fractals, Gerald A.Edgar, editor, Addison-Wesley (1993) ISBN 0-201-58701-7
  * Karl Menger, Dimensionstheorie, (1928) B.G Teubner Publishers, Leipzig.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Menger sponge  
  * An interactive Menger sponge
  * Fractal polyhedra (VRML) and interactive Java models
  * Puzzle Hunt â Video explaining Zeno's paradoxes using Menger-Sierpinski sponge
  * The Business Card Menger Sponge Project
  * Menger Sponge Assembly Construction of a Level-3 Menger Sponge from business cards
  * Mengermania â Construction of a Level 4 Menger Sponge from index cards with detailed status updates
  * Menger Sponge Animations â Menger Sponge Animations up to Level 9, discussion of optimization for 3d.
  * L3 Menger Sponge with business cards 2006 \- An L3 Menger Sponge by students at Cornell College built in 2006
  * Level 3 Menger Sponge made of Business Cards \- A Level 3 Menger Sponge built by students at Mississippi State University out of 48,000 folded business cards.
  * Menger sphere, rendered in SunFlow

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Menger_sponge"

Categories: Fractals | Curves | Topological spaces

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 20:15.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



