
# Seventh Framework Programme

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The logo of the programme

The Seventh Framework Programme for research and technological development
(FP7) is the European Union's chief instrument for funding research over the
period 2007 to 2013. It bundles all research-related EU initiatives together
under a common roof playing a crucial role in reaching the goals of growth,
competitiveness and employment. CORDIS is the official portal for
participating in FP7 and following related developments in European science
and technology. As was the case for FP6, its main objective is to further the
construction of the European Research Area. Its specific goals are fourfold:

  * To gain leadership in key scientific and technology areas
  * To stimulate the creativity and excellence of European research
  * To develop and strengthen the human potential of European research
  * To enhance research and innovation capacity throughout Europe

The total budget for FP7, including the non-nuclear research of the Joint
Research Centre, is 51 Billion euros over 7 years. The overall budget is
fixed, and the split of it along thematic priorities and the content of those
priorities was decided in November 2006.

## Contents

  * 1 Vocabulary
  * 2 Timeline
  * 3 FP7 Specific Programmes
    * 3.1 Cooperation (64% of the non-nuclear budget)
    * 3.2 Ideas (15% of the non-nuclear budget)
    * 3.3 People (9% of the non-nuclear budget)
    * 3.4 Capacities (9% of the non-nuclear budget)
  * 4 Project Types
    * 4.1 Collaborative Research Projects
    * 4.2 Networks of Excellence
    * 4.3 Support and Coordination Actions
    * 4.4 Marie Curie Actions
  * 5 See also
  * 6 National contact points for advice on FP7
  * 7 Expert assistance
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Vocabulary

<IMG>

<IMG>

Display outside DG RTD

Trying to understand how the Framework Programme works requires a bit of
vocabulary understanding. Here are some useful definitions (the indent
reflects the increasing level of granularity):

  * Framework Programme: this is the umbrella of the Programme. The acronym is "FP", usually followed by the edition: "FP7" in this case.
  * Specific Programme: This is the first layer of breakdown of FP7. There are 4 Specific Programmes under FP7: Cooperation, Ideas, People and Capacities (see below). Specific Programmes are sometimes referred as Activities.
  * Non-nuclear vs. nuclear research The nuclear activities under FP7 are somewhat different from the non-nuclear. Like all EU nuclear issues, FP7 nuclear research is guided by the EURATOM-treaty (instead of the Treaty on European Union). FP7 nuclear research receives â¬ 2.7 billion spread over 4 years (2007-2011)[1].
  * Thematic Area: This is the second layer of breakdown for the Cooperation Specific Programme of FP7. There are 10 Thematic Priorities in the Cooperation Specific Programme of FP7 (see below)
  * Challenges: This is the third layer of breakdown for Thematic Areas. The number of Challenges vary for each Thematic Areas and won't be finalized until end of 2006.
  * Work Programme: For every Thematic Area, the European Commission publishes a Work Programme that covers a period of 1 to 3 years. This document provides in detail the areas that will be funded within each Thematic Areas as well as a calendar for Call for Proposals and an indicative budget.
  * Call for Proposals: About once a year for each Thematic Area, the European Commission publishes a Call for Proposal, requesting interested entities to submit Proposals with the aim to be founded. When Calls for Proposals cover more than one Thematic Area, they are called Joint Calls. Proposal's content is usually very close to the Work Programme phrasing, with some further precisions.
  * Tracks: Calls for Proposals usually cover different Challenges within a Thematic Area. Tracks are sub-parts of Calls for Proposals and usually address a specific challenge. Tracks are usually known by their number, which is made of 3 digits. For example, FP7 3.4.5 should be understood as a call: part of FP7, 3rd Thematic Area, 4th Call for Proposals, 5th Track.

## [edit] Timeline

FP7 was only launched at the end of 2006 with the first Calls for Proposals
published 22 December 2006 on [1]. However, first Work Programmes were due to
be available in Oct/Nov 2006, providing a good flavour of the upcoming Call's
content. A detailed and updated list of FP7 past and upcoming milestone is
linked below.

## [edit] FP7 Specific Programmes

Four Specific Programmes were created to address the corresponding objectives.
In addition, 3.5% of the budget are dedicated to the non-nuclear activities of
the Joint Research Centre.

### [edit] Cooperation (64% of the non-nuclear budget)

Any transnational research activities can be funded within this programme. The
following ten thematic priorities have been defined (part of Cooperation
budget):

  1. Health \- 19%
  2. Food, Agriculture and Fisheries, Biotechnology \- 6%
  3. Information and Communication Technologies \- 28%
  4. Nanosciences, Nanotechnologies, Materials and new production technologies - 11%
  5. Energy \- 7% 
    The IEA noted that FP7 was drafted before energy emerged as a critical issue on the EU's agenda. This, and also that Nuclear Fusion consumes more then half of the Communities' energy research funding, although it won't address any energy issues before 2050, triggered the IEA to advise the EC to consider a recasting of FP7 before it expires to ensure a sufficient volume of energy R&D[2].
  6. Environment (including climate change) - 6%
  7. Transport (including Aeronautics) - 13%
  8. Socio-economic sciences and Humanities \- 2%
  9. Security
  10. Space

This programme also includes cooperation between the EU and third countries.

### [edit] Ideas (15% of the non-nuclear budget)

Ideas will, similarly to Cooperation, finance directly scientific research.
However, it will differ on the following aspects:

  * It will not be linked to the thematic priorities of FP7 and will include engineering, social sciences and the humanities.
  * It will not be managed by the European Commission, but by an autonomous entity: the European Research Council.
  * It will focus on research at the "frontier of knowledge", where risks are higher. The expected fields of research are therefore expected to be more fundamental.

### [edit] People (9% of the non-nuclear budget)

This Specific Programme is focussed on supporting the training, the mobility
and the career development of European researchers, mainly through the
expansion of Marie Curie actions.

### [edit] Capacities (9% of the non-nuclear budget)

The Capacities specific programme is targeted at enhancing research
infrastructures and improving its usage, promoting "Regions of Knowledge",
supporting regional research-driven clusters, and stimulating the research
potential in the EU's "convergence" regions.

Additionally, this part of FP7 will contain some budget dedicated to policy
development, e.g. coordination of research policies.

## [edit] Project Types

These were known as Financial Instruments in the Sixth Framework Programme
(FP6). Project Types describe the nature of funding open to participants in
FP7. Not all project types will apply to all programme areas. The applicable
project types will be published in the Work Programmes and the Calls for
Proposals. Partly as a result of simplification measures to be implemented in
FP7, Project Types have been rationalised, although there is some element of
continuity from FP6. The Project Types are:

### [edit] Collaborative Research Projects

These fund projects on the basis of innovative research outputs described in
the form of project deliverables. In FP7 there will be small and large
Collaborative Research Projects. The equivalent FP6 Financial Instruments were
Integrated Projects (IP) and Specific Targeted Research Projects (STREP).

### [edit] Networks of Excellence

As with FP6, the main aim of a Network of Excellence (NoE) is to integrate
research at a European level. Thus, participants are paid on the basis of
degree of integration achieved and the number of researchers actively
participating in the network rather than research outputs.

### [edit] Support and Coordination Actions

Support Actions (SA) fund studies or other measures in support of the relevant
Work Programme. Coordination Actions (CA) fund networking research that
previously was primarily carried out at national level. SA and CA were
separate actions in FP6.

### [edit] Marie Curie Actions

The People Specific Programme refers to the Marie Curie actions ('Mobility' in
FP6). These fund research training and mobility of researchers. The main
actions are individual fellowships for post-graduate researchers (three
categories: Intra-European Fellowships, Incoming International Fellowships and
Outgoing International Fellowships) and Marie Curie Networks, where
institutions cooperate to provide joint training programmes for researchers.
There is also an action to support cooperation between industry and academia,
and reintegration grants aimed at previous Marie Curie fellows.

## [edit] See also

  * Lisbon Strategy
  * Sixth Framework Programme
  * European Research Area (ERA)
  * European Research Council (ERC)
  * European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT)
  * Marie Curie Fellows Association (MCFA)
  * Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme (CIP)
  * EMDESK
  * European Framework Programmes for Research and Technological Development
  * European Research Council
  * SEA-EU-NET

## [edit] National contact points for advice on FP7

Each member state funds a National Contact Point, which is an organisation
designed to help those submitting proposals or looking for European partners
by providing guidance, practical information and assistance on all aspects of
participation in FP7 on a non commercial basis.

  * List of all national contact points

## [edit] Expert assistance

In addition to the National Contact Points, various commercial services
provide assistance in the development of bids for FP7 funding; and for project
support and management. A wide selection of literature and handbooks are
commercially available on a number of FP7 topics. Training courses on proposal
writing and management are available in most major cities in Europe.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ CORDIS: FP7 : Budget
  2. ^ http://www.iea.org/textbase/publications/free_new_Desc.asp?PUBS_ID=2045

## [edit] External links

<IMG>

This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or
guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate
external links.  
  * FP7 on CORDIS (Community Research and Development Information Service)
  * FP7 English page
  * Seventh Framework Programme
  * News on Seventh Framework Programme
  * Seventh Framework background and news EurActiv.com
  * FP7 Financial Regulations Helpdesk
  * UK - Energie Helpline (Government-funded National Contact Point, for UK organisations only)
  * Enterprise Ireland (Government-funded National Contact Point, for Irish organisations only)
  * SenterNovem - EG-Liaison (Government-funded National Contact Point in The Netherlands)
  * FP7 in North East England (Government-funded FP7 support services in North East England)
  * Egypt - FP7 Focal Points Network (STINEG, for organisations in Egypt considering participation in FP7)
  * EIRC: Gateway for Indian entrants to FP7
  * FP7 European Project TAS3 : Trusting Architecture for Securely Shared Services
  * FP7 European Project TAS3 Community website
  * European Funding Understood
  * FP7 European Project INFOCON website
  * InvestNI (Government-funded National Contact Point, for Northern Ireland organisations only)
  * FP7 European Project INTERACTION : Understanding driver interactions with In-Vehicle Technologies

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seventh_Framework_Programme"

Categories: Organizations established in 2007 | 2013 disestablishments |
European Union and science and technology | Science and technology in Europe |
European research networks | Funding bodies | FP7 Projects

Hidden categories: Wikipedia external links cleanup

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * RomÃ¢nÄ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 08:11 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



