
# Personal information management

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article is written like a personal reflection or essay and may require
cleanup. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style.
(October 2008)  
Personal information management (PIM) refers to both the practice and the
study of the activities people perform in order to acquire, organize,
maintain, retrieve and use information items such as documents (paper-based
and digital), web pages and email messages for everyday use to complete tasks
(work-related or not) and fulfill a personâs various roles (as parent,
employee, friend, member of community, etc.).

One ideal of PIM is that we always have the right information in the right
place, in the right form, and of sufficient completeness and quality to meet
our current need. Technologies and tools such as personal information managers
help us spend less time with time-consuming and error-prone activities of PIM
(such as looking for information). We then have more time to make creative,
intelligent use of the information at hand in order to get things done, or to
simply enjoy the information itself.

## Contents

  * 1 Tools
  * 2 Interest in the study of PIM
  * 3 PIM-related activities and PIM-related areas
    * 3.1 Cognitive psychology and cognitive science
    * 3.2 Human-computer interaction/human-information interaction
    * 3.3 The management of data, information, knowledge, time and tasks
  * 4 Personal Information Manager
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 Further reading
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Tools

For many people, this ideal seems far away. There are a bewildering number of
tools available for managing personal information, but these tools can become
a part of the problem leading to âinformation fragmentationâ. Different
devices and applications often come with their separate ways of storing and
organizing information.

## [edit] Interest in the study of PIM

Interest in the study of PIM has increased in recent years. One goal in the
study of PIM is to identify ways to introduce new tool support without
inadvertently increasing the complexity of a personâs information management
challenge. The study of PIM means understanding better how people manage
information across tools and over time. It is not enough simply to study, for
example, e-mail use in isolation. A related point is that the value of a new
tool must be assessed over time and in a broader context of a personâs
various PIM activities.

## [edit] PIM-related activities and PIM-related areas

PIM shares considerable, potentially synergistic overlap with disciplines such
as cognitive science, human-computer interaction, information science,
artificial intelligence, database management and information retrieval. PIM
relates to but differs from other fields of inquiry that study the
interactions between people, information and technology.

### [edit] Cognitive psychology and cognitive science

Cognitive psychology, is the study of how people learn and remember, problem
solve, and make decisions, necessarily also includes the study of how people
make smart use of available information. The related field of cognitive
science, in its efforts to apply these questions more broadly to the study and
simulation of intelligent behavior, is also related to PIM. Cognitive science
has strong connections to, some would say subsumes, the field of artificial
intelligence.

There is great potential for a mutually beneficial interplay between cognitive
science and PIM. Sub-areas of cognitive science of clear relevance to PIM
include problem solving and decision making. For example, folders created to
hold information for a big project such as âplan my weddingâ may sometimes
resemble a problem-decomposition.[1] To take another example, signal detection
task[2] has long been used to frame and explain human behavior and has
recently been used as a basis for analyzing our choices concerning what
information to keep and how â a key activity of PIM.[3]

Or consider categorization and concept formation. How are categories and
concepts learned and used? Categories and concepts can be seen directly but
may be reflected in the tags and folders people use to organize their
information. Or consider the activities of reading and writing. Both are areas
of study in cognitive psychology with clear relevance to the study of PIM.

Now large portions of a document may be the product of âcopy-and-pasteâ
operations (from our previous writings) rather than a product of original
writing. Certainly, management of text pieces pasted for re-use is a PIM
activity, and this raises several interesting questions. How do we go about
deciding when to re-use and when to write from scratch? We may sometimes spend
more time chasing down a paragraph we have previously written than it would
have taken to simply write a new paragraph expressing the same thoughts.
Beyond this, we can wonder at what point a reliance on an increasing (and
increasingly available) supply of previously written material begins to impact
our creativity.

As people do PIM they work in an external environment that includes other
people, available technology and organizational setting. This means that
situated cognition, distributed cognition, and social cognition all relate to
the study of PIM.

### [edit] Human-computer interaction/human-information interaction

The study of PIM is also related to the field of human-computer interaction
(HCI). But PIM research puts emphasis on the broader study of how people
manage their information over time using a variety of tools â some computer-
based, some not.

### [edit] The management of data, information, knowledge, time and tasks

The study of information management and knowledge management in organizations
relates to the study of PIM. Jones notes that issues seen first at an
organizational level often migrate to the PIM domain.[4]

PIM can help to motivate and will also benefit from work in information
retrieval and database management. For example, data mining techniques might
be applied to mine and structure personal information.

PIM also relates to what is sometimes called personal knowledge
management(PKM).

Knowledge acquisition/elicitation has been an important area of study in its
own right receiving special prominence in the 1980's as a way to define rules
to drive expert systems. But knowledge elicited is usually written down in
some form. Knowledge written down is information -- to be managed like other
information.

By similar argument, a discussion of time management or task management on a
personal level quickly takes us back to a discussion of PIM. Both time and
task management make heavy use of information tools and external forms of
information such as to-do lists, calendars, timelines, Gantt charts, etc. This
information, to be managed like other information.

## [edit] Personal Information Manager

A personal information manager (often referred to as a PIM tool or, more
simply, a PIM) is a type of application software that functions as a personal
organizer. The acronym PIM is now more commonly used in reference to Personal
information management as a field of study.

As an information management tool, PIM applications are primarily used to
facilitate the recording, tracking, and management of certain types of
"personal information". Personal information can include any of the following:

  * Personal notes/journal
  * Address books
  * Lists (including task lists)
  * Significant calendar dates
    * Birthdays
    * Anniversaries
    * Appointments and meeting
  * Reminders
  * Email, instant message archives
  * Fax communications, voicemail
  * Project management features
  * RSS/Atom feeds
  * Alerts

The next generation of PIM applications will offer more comprehensive
information management capabilities, including synthesizing and sharing
information. Some PIM software products are capable of synchronizing data with
another PIM tool over a computer network (including mobile ad-hoc networks, or
MANETs). This feature usually does not allow for continuous, concurrent data
updates, but rather enables point-in-time updating between different
computers, including desktop computers, laptop computers, and personal digital
assistants.

Prior to the introduction of the term âPDAâ (Personal digital assistant)
by Apple in 1992, handheld personal organizers such as the Sharp Wizard and
the Psion Organiser were also referred to as "PIMs".[5][6]

## [edit] See also

  * Personal knowledge management
  * Calendar
  * Time management
  * Information management
  * List of personal information managers
  * Online Office
  * Personal organizer
  * Personal wiki
  * Semantic desktop
  * Desktop wiki
  * Attention management

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Jones, W., Phuwanartnurak, A. J., Gill, R., & Bruce, H. (2005, April 2-7). Don't take my folders away! Organizing personal information to get things done. Paper presented at the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2005), Portland, OR.
  2. ^ Peterson, W. W., Birdsall, T. G., & Fox, W. C. (1954). The theory of signal detectability. Institute of Radio Engineers Transactions, PGIT-4, 171-212.
  3. ^ Jones, W. (2004).Finders, keepers? The present and future perfect in support of personal information management. First Monday.
  4. ^ Jones, W. (2007). Personal information management. In B. Cronin (Ed.), Annual Review of Information Science and Technology (ARIST) (Vol. 41). Medford, NJ: Information Today.
  5. ^ The Return of the PDA, Marketing Computers, February, 1995
  6. ^ History of the Personal Data Assistant (PDA), H2G2, BBC, March 31, 2004

## [edit] Further reading

  * Jones, W. (2008). Keeping Found Things Found: The Study and Practice of Personal Information Management. Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. ISBN 978-0-12-370866-3
  * Jones, W. & Teevan, J. (Eds.) (2007). Personal Information Management. Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press. ISBN 978-0-295-98737-8

## [edit] External links

  * Who's working on Personal Information Management? Authored by Richard Boardman, Imperial College London (July 2003)
  * Resources for Personal Information Management Community Portal managed by the University of Washington, features a link collection, workshops, books
  * Memoria-Mea Project, MISG/ICTI EIA-FR Switzerland
  * List of PIM publications at the Keeping Found Things Found (KFTF) project website.
  * 'Improving Tool Support for Personal Information Management' \- Doctoral dissertation by Richard Boardman, Imperial College, London (2004).
  * PIM 2008
  * A list of personal document management software

v â¢ d â¢ e

Free open-source collaborative software  
Client-Server

Bongo Â· Buni Meldware Â· Citadel Â· Kolab Â· OpenGroupware.org Â· Open-
Xchange Â· Scalix Â· Zimbra Â· Zarafa  
Web based

Citadel Â· eGroupWare Â· Group-Office Â· Horde Groupware Â· KnowledgeTree Â·
Kolab Â· Open-Xchange Â· phpGroupWare Â· ProjectPier Â· Simple Groupware  
Personal information managers

Evolution Â· Kontact Â· Spicebird Â· Mozilla Sunbird Â· Mozilla
Thunderbird/Lightning  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Personal_information_management"

Categories: Personal information managers | Human-computer interaction |
Information management

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing style editing from October 2008
| All articles needing style editing

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 15:28 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



