
# Quality function deployment

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Quality function deployment (QFD) is a âmethod to transform user demands
into design quality, to deploy the functions forming quality, and to deploy
methods for achieving the design quality into subsystems and component parts,
and ultimately to specific elements of the manufacturing process.â [1], as
described by Dr. Yoji Akao, who originally developed QFD in Japan in 1966,
when the author combined his work in quality assurance and quality control
points with function deployment used in Value Engineering.

QFD is designed to help planners focus on characteristics of a new or existing
product or service from the viewpoints of market segments, company, or
technology-development needs. The technique yields graphs and matrices.

QFD helps transform customer needs (the voice of the customer [VOC]) into
engineering characteristics (and appropriate test methods) for a product or
service, prioritizing each product or service characteristic while
simultaneously setting development targets for product or service.

## Contents

  * 1 Areas of application
  * 2 History
  * 3 Techniques and tools based on QFD
    * 3.1 House of Quality
    * 3.2 Pugh concept selection
    * 3.3 Modular Function Deployment
  * 4 Relationship to other techniques
  * 5 Notes and references

  
## [edit] Areas of application

<IMG>

<IMG>

QFD House of Quality for Enterprise Product Development Processes

QFD is applied in a wide variety of services, consumer products, military
needs (such as the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter[2]), and emerging technology
products. The technique is also used to identify and document competitive
marketing strategies and tactics (see example QFD House of Quality for
Enterprise Product Development, at right). QFD is considered a key practice of
Design for Six Sigma (DFSS - as seen in the referenced roadmap).[3] It is also
implicated in the new ISO 9000:2000 standard which focuses on customer
satisfaction.

Results of QFD have been applied in Japan and elsewhere into deploying the
high-impact controllable factors in Strategic planning and Strategic
management (also known as Hoshin Kanri, Hoshin Planning,[4] or Policy
Deployment).

Acquiring market needs by listening to the Voice of Customer (VOC), sorting
the needs, and numerically prioritizing them (using techniques such as the
Analytic Hierarchy Process) are the early tasks in QFD. Traditionally, going
to the Gemba (the "real place" where value is created for the customer) is
where these customer needs are evidenced and compiled.

While many books and articles on "how to do QFD" are available, there is a
relative paucity of example matrices available. QFD matrices become highly
proprietary due to the high density of product or service information found
therein.

Notable U.S. companies using QFD techniques include the U.S. automobile
manufacturers (GM, Ford, Chrysler LLC) and their suppliers, IBM,
Raytheon,General Electric,Boeing, Lockheed Martin,Eaton Corporation and many
others.[citation needed]

## [edit] History

While originally developed for manufacturing industries, interest in the use
of QFD-based ideas in software development commenced with work by R. J.
Thackeray and G. Van Treeck,[5] for example in Object-oriented programming[6]
and use case driven software development.[7]

Since its early use in the United States, QFD met with initial enthusiasm then
plummeting popularity when it was discovered that much time could be wasted if
poor group decision making techniques were employed.[citation needed]
Organizational/corporate culture has an effect on the ability to change
organizational human processes and on the sustainability of the changes. In
particular, in organizations exhibiting strong cultural norms and rich sets of
tacit assumptions that prevent objective discussion of historical courses of
action, QFD may be resisted due to its ability to expose tacit assumptions and
unspoken rules.[citation needed] It has been suggested that a learning
organization can more easily overcome these issues due to the more transparent
nature of the organizational culture and to the readiness of the membership to
discuss relevant cultural norms.[citation needed]

## [edit] Techniques and tools based on QFD

### [edit] House of Quality

House of Quality appeared in 1972 in the design of an oil tanker by Mitsubishi
Heavy Industries.[8][citation needed] Akao has reiterated numerous times that
a House of Quality is not QFD, it is just an example of one tool.[9]

A Flash tutorial exists showing the build process of the traditional QFD
"House of Quality" (HOQ).[10] (Although this example may violate QFD
principles, the basic sequence of HOQ building are illustrative.) There are
also free QFD templates available that walk users through the process of
creating a House of Quality.[11]

Other tools extend the analysis beyond quality to cost, technology,
reliability, function, parts, technology, manufacturing, and service
deployments.

In addition, the same technique can extend the method into the constituent
product subsystems, configuration items, assemblies, and parts. From these
detail level components, fabrication and assembly process QFD charts can be
developed to support statistical process control techniques.

### [edit] Pugh concept selection

Pugh Concept Selection can be used in coordination with QFD to select a
promising product or service configuration from among listed alternatives.

### [edit] Modular Function Deployment

Modular Function Deployment uses QFD to establish customer requirements and to
identify important design requirements with a special emphasis on modularity.

## [edit] Relationship to other techniques

The QFD-associated "Hoshin Kanri" process somewhat resembles Management by
objectives (MBO), but adds a significant element in the goal setting process,
called "catchball". Use of these Hoshin techniques by U.S. companies such as
Hewlett Packard have been successful in focusing and aligning company
resources to follow stated strategic goals throughout an organizational
hierarchy.

Since the early introduction of QFD, the technique has been developed to
shorten the time span and reduce the required group efforts (such as Richard
Zultner's Blitz QFD).

## [edit] Notes and references

  1. ^ Akao, Yoji. "Development History of Quality Function Deployment". The Customer Driven Approach to Quality Planning and Deployment. Minato, Tokyo 107 Japan: Asian Productivity Organization. pp. 339\. ISBN 92-833-1121-3.
  2. ^ http://www.di.ufpe.br/~req_case/Seminarios/Prioridades/qfd.pdf
  3. ^ http://www.c2c-solutions.com/pdfs/eQFDRoadmap.pdf QFD/DFSS Roadmap and flowchart
  4. ^ Strategic Planning With Hoshin
  5. ^ "QFD for Embedded Systems and Software Product Development," in GOAL/QPC 6th Annual Conference Proceedings (Boston: GOAL/QPC, 1989)
  6. ^ *Walter Lamia. 1995. âIntegrating QFD with Object-oriented Software Design Methodologies.â Presented at the 7th Symposium on QFD.
  7. ^ Richard Denney. 2005. Succeeding with Use Cases: Working Smart to Deliver Quality, Addison-Wesley Object Technology Series, Addison-Wesley Professional, ISBN 0321316436
  8. ^ HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW, The House of Quality by John R. Hauser and Don Clausing, May-June 1988
  9. ^ QFD FAQ: Frequently Asked Questions about QFD
  10. ^ http://www.webducate.net/qfd/
  11. ^ QFD Online - Free House of Quality (QFD) Templates for Excel

  * Lou Cohen. 1995. Quality Function Deployment. Prentice Hall PTR, ISBN 0201633302.cz:QFD(Quality Function Deployment)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quality_function_deployment"

Categories: Anticipatory thinking | Decision theory

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since November 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 March 2009, at 04:53 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



