
# Library 2.0

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this article if you can. (June 2008)  
<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (February 2008)  
Library 2.0 is a loosely defined model for a modernized form of library
service that reflects a transition within the library world in the way that
services are delivered to users. The focus is on user-centered change and
participation in the creation of content and community. [1] The concept of
Library 2.0 borrows from that of Business 2.0 and Web 2.0 and follows some of
the same underlying philosophies. This includes online services like the use
of OPAC systems and an increased flow of information from the user back to the
library.

With Library 2.0, library services are constantly updated and reevaluated to
best serve library users. Library 2.0 also attempts to harness the library
user in the design and implementation of library services by encouraging
feedback and participation. Proponents of this concept, sometimes referred to
as Radical Trust expect that the Library 2.0 model for service will ultimately
replace traditional, one-directional service offerings that have characterized
libraries for centuries.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 Key principles
  * 3 Concerns and Considerations
  * 4 The Library 2.0 Online Public Access Catalog
  * 5 The debate surrounding Library 2.0
  * 6 References
  * 7 See also
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Overview

The term "Library 2.0" was coined by Michael Casey on his blog LibraryCrunch
as a direct spin-off of the terms Business 2.0 and Web 2.0. Casey suggested
that libraries, especially public libraries, are at a crossroads where many of
the elements of Web 2.0 have applicable value within the library community,
both in technology-driven services and in non-technology based services. In
particular, he described the need for libraries to adopt a strategy for
constant change while promoting a participatory role for library users.

Library 2.0 made its conference debut at Internet Librarian 2005 in October,
2005, when Michael Stephens of Saint Joseph County Public Library addressed
the idea in relation to the typical library website.

A September, 2006, article in Library Journal, titled âLibrary 2.0: Service
for the next-generation library,â begins by expressing the benefit of
Library 2.0 to library administrators and taxpayers as providing âmore
efficient ways of delivering services to achieve greater returns on financial
investments.â The article continued by asserting that the much discussed
Library 2.0 is important for librarians as it may radically change our
customer service and interaction.[1]

With Library 2.0, library services are frequently evaluated and updated to
meet the changing needs of library users. Library 2.0 also calls for libraries
to encourage user participation and feedback in the development and
maintenance of library services. The active and empowered library user is a
significant component of Library 2.0. With information and ideas flowing in
both directions â from the library to the user and from the user to the
library â library services have the ability to evolve and improve on a
constant and rapid basis. The user is participant, co-creator, builder and
consultant â whether the product is virtual or physical.

## [edit] Key principles

  * Browser \+ Web 2.0 Applications + Connectivity = Full-featured OPAC
  * Harness the library user in both design and implementation of services
  * Library users should be able to craft and modify library provided services
  * Harvest and integrate ideas and products from peripheral fields into library service models
  * Continue to examine and improve services and be willing to replace them at any time with newer and better services.

## [edit] Concerns and Considerations

Some concerns about Library 2.0 relate to access to technology, privacy[1][2]
and security. For example, Casey and Savastinuk [3] suggest allowing patrons
to tag or blog anonymously. In 2006, Steve Lawson, humanities liaison
librarian, wrote a blog post entitled âA Library 2.0 skeptic's reading
listâ that collected links to blogs which discuss these concerns. Steve says
âI'm not anti-Library 2.0 . . . I like to think of Library 2.0 as a
continuing conversation about the future of libraries, and it makes sense to
me to try to round up some voices that challenge Library 2.0 conventional
wisdom.â[4]

## [edit] The Library 2.0 Online Public Access Catalog

See : OPAC#The Next-Generation Catalog

Library 2.0 is a new way of providing library service through new Internet
technologies, with emphasis on âuser-centeredâ change and interaction.
Like Web 2.0, a full-featured Library 2.0 OPAC gets better the more that users
are involved in the process of interacting with the catalog and sharing
content.

Librarians have been working to retool library catalogs in order to make them
more useful for patrons to find, organize, and interact with information in a
way that has infinite potential for user customization. These new types of
catalogs are a shift from "isolated information silos" to "interlinked
computing platforms."[5] In the past the information flow was mostly one way,
from library to user. With new web tools information can be released to flow
in every direction (library to user, user to library, library to library, and
user to user).

Jessamyn West, on her librarian.net website, authored âWhat We Want: An OPAC
Manifesto,â which broke down the needs of library staff, geeks, and users in
their OPAC. These valuable suggestions inform librarians of the flexibility,
customizability and plain language approach that is desired by users in their
OPAC. Librarians should be aware of these issues so that planning for
improvement can begin.[6]

## [edit] The debate surrounding Library 2.0

Library 2.0 has been a source of debate in the blogosphere. Some librarian
bloggers have argued that these key principles are not new and have been part
of the service philosophies of many library reformers since the 19th century.
Others are calling for more concrete examples of how libraries can get to
Library 2.0. Walt Crawford, for example, argues that Library 2.0 comprises a
combination of tools and attitudes which are excellent ideas and not new to
librarianship, a few business- and tool-focused attitudes which will not serve
all users and user communities, and incorrectly places libraries as the
appropriate source for all users to gather all information[1].

Proponents of Library 2.0, such as Stephen Abram[2], Michael Stephens[3], Paul
Miller[4] and others, have spoken to these criticisms, arguing that while
individual pieces of Library 2.0 may not be entirely new, the convergence of
these service goals and ideas with many new Web 2.0 technologies has led to a
new generation of library service.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c Library 2.0 - 9/1/2006 - Library Journal
  2. ^ Library Juice Â» The Central Problem of Library 2.0: Privacy
  3. ^ http://www.libraryjournal.com/article/CA6365200.html
  4. ^ Steve Lawson, A Library 2.0 skeptic's reading list, http://library.coloradocollege.edu/steve/archives/2006/05/a_library_20_sk.html
  5. ^ Wikipedia contributors, "Web 2.0," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Web_2.0&oldid=206758560 (accessed April 20, 2008).
  6. ^ Jessamyn West and friends, What We Want: An OPAC Manifesto, http://www.librarian.net/opac/

  

  * ^ Abram, S., Casey, M., Blyberg, J., & Stephens, M. (2006). A SirsiDynix Institute Conversation: The 2.0 Meme - Web 2.0, Library 2.0, Librarian 2.0, February 2006.

  * Blyberg, John. (2005). ILS Customer Bill of Rights, Blyberg.net

  * Blyberg, John. (2006). 11 reasons why Library 2.0 exists and matters, Blyberg.net

  * Boog, J. (2005). Library 2.0 Movement Sees Benefits in Collaboration with Patrons, Publish, November 2005.

  * Casey, Michael. (2005). Working Towards a Definition of Library 2.0, LibraryCrunch, 21 October 2005.

  * Casey, M. & Stephens, M. (2005). Where Do We Begin? A Library 2.0 Conversation with Michael Casey, ALA TechSource Blog, December 2005.

  * ^ Casey, M. & Stephens, M. (2006). Better Library Services for More People, ALA TechSource Blog, January 2006.

  * Casey, Michael & Savastinuk, Laura. (2007) Library 2.0: A Guide to Participatory Library Service, Information Today Press, 2007. ISBN 978-1-57387-297-3 ISBN 1-57387-297-0

  * Casey, Michael & Savastinuk, Laura. (2006) Library 2.0: Service for the Next-generation Library, Library Journal, September 1, 2006.

  * Courtney, Nancy. (2007) Library 2.0 and Beyond: Innovative Technologies and Tomorrow's User, Libraries Unlimited, 2007. ISBN 978-1-59158-537-4

  * ^ Crawford, Walt. (2006). Library 2.0 and 'Library 2.0'" Cites and Insights 6, 2. January 2006.

  * Farkas, Meredith G. (2007). Social Software in Libraries : Building Collaboration, Communication, and Community Online. Information Today, 2007. ISBN 978-1-57387-275-1 ISBN 1-57387-275-X

  * Harris, Christopher. (2006). Library 2.0 Week (Updated), Infomancy, January 2006.

  * Harris, Christopher. (2006) School Library 2.0, School Library Journal, May 1, 2006.

  * Levine, Jenny. (2005). Hello, Library (1.0) World!, ALA TechSource Blog, 10 October 2005.

  * Maness, J. (2006). Library 2.0 Theory: Web 2.0 and Its Implications for Libraries. Webology, 3 (2), Article 25.

  * Miller, P., (2005). Web 2.0: Building the New Library. Ariadne, No.45 October 2005.

  * ^ Miller, P., Chad, K. (2005). Do libraries matter? - The rise of Library 2.0, Talis November 2005.

  * Miller, P. (2006). Library 2.0: The Challenge of Disruptive Innovation, Talis February 2006.
  * Stephens, Michael. (2006). Web 2.0 & Libraries: Best Practices for Social Software, Library Technology Reports, 42:4.
  * Talis Talk ( 31 January 2006). Podcast with Thomas Brevik, Michael Casey, Ken Chad, Paul Miller, T. Scott Plutchak, Michael Stephens and Richard Wallis.

## [edit] See also

  * Learning 2.0
  * User-generated content
  * Web 2.0

## [edit] External links

  * library2.0 tag at Delicious \- follow the pointers
  * Library 2.0 tag at Technorati
  * Library 2.0 article at LISWiki, a Library and information science wiki
  * Ambient Librarian \- a Library 2.0 wiki
  * Yarra Plenty Library Melbourne, Australia
  * Public Library Charlotte Mecklenberg County, NC, USA
  * The 23 Things
  * BEYOND LIBRARY 2.0: Building Communities, Connections, & Strategies \- Theme of the conference Computers in Libraries 2007
  * Library 2.0, social network on Ning
  * Online Librarian Community - Library 2.0
  * Building a Library 2.0 OPAC (Wiki)
  * What We Want: An OPAC Manifesto by Jessamyn West and friends
  * Is your OPAC fun? (a manifesto of sorts) from the LibraryThing Thingology Blog
  * Library 2.0 and the Problem of Hate Speech (article)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Library_2.0"

Categories: Buzzwords | Library 2.0 | Library and information science |
Neologisms

Hidden categories: Cleanup from June 2008 | All pages needing cleanup |
Articles lacking in-text citations

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 26 February 2009, at 16:24.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



