
# Vertical search

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2007)  
<IMG>

This article's tone or style may not be appropriate for Wikipedia. Specific
concerns may be found on the talk page. See Wikipedia's guide to writing
better articles for suggestions. (December 2007)  
Vertical search, or domain-specific search, part of a larger sub-grouping
known as "specialized" search, is a relatively new tier in the Internet
search, industry consisting of search engines that focus on specific slices of
content. The type of content in special focus may be based on topicality or
information type. For example, an intelligent medical search engine would
clearly be specialized in terms of its topical focus, whereas a video search
engine would seek out results within content that is in a video format. So
vertical search may focus on all manner of differentiating criteria, such as
particular locations, multimedia object types and so on.

## Contents

  * 1 Origins of vertical search
  * 2 Vertical search vs. broad-based search
  * 3 The vertical search user
  * 4 The buyer in vertical search marketing
  * 5 Growth in vertical search
  * 6 Vertical Search Examples
  * 7 Vertical search design and advertising models
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Origins of vertical search

Niche search engines have existed for years. The number of these search
engines being introduced has increased recently. Local search is already a
burgeoning subset, with Google Local and many newspapers offering this
functionality.

## [edit] Vertical search vs. broad-based search

Broad-based search engines such as Google or Yahoo fetch very large numbers of
documents using a Web crawler. Another program called an indexer then reads
these documents and creates a search index based on words contained in each
document. Each search engine uses a proprietary algorithm to create its
indexes so that, ideally, only meaningful results are returned for each query.

Vertical search engines, on the other hand, send their spiders out to a highly
refined database, and their indexes contain information about a specific
topic. As a result, they are of most value to people interested in a
particular area; whatâs more, the companies that advertise on these search
engines reach a very focused audience. For example, there are search engines
for veterinarians, doctors, patients, job seekers, house hunters, recruiters,
travelers and corporate purchasers, to name a few.

## [edit] The vertical search user

As the broad-based search engines have gotten broader, so have their search
results. This has become increasingly frustrating to users who have turned to
search engines to find information on a specialized topic, be it local
information, travel sites or specific business channels.

This is especially true of the latter. In the business marketing profession,
terms that have very specific meanings in certain industries will yield a host
of irrelevant results when used as keywords on the big search engines. For
example, say a dentist is looking for information on ceramics, a common
material used in dental work. If the dentist performs a Google search on the
keyword "ceramics", Google will serve up millions of results, but most of the
entries on the first few pages will concern hobbies like pottery. On the other
hand, if the dentist performs the same search on DentalProducts.net, a well-
regarded media company Web site, it will return much more relevant results.

LookSmart, an online media and technology company that has launched more than
180 vertical search sites, contends that Web users will increasingly use the
Internet the way they do cable television, opting for specialized channels
that speak directly to their concerns. This company says vertical search
engines will chip away at Googleâs and Yahooâs audiences the same way
cable TV channels such as TLC and the National Geographic Channel have eaten
into network audiences.

## [edit] The buyer in vertical search marketing

On the simplest level, the vertical search buyer is a marketer that wants to
be found by the user of one of these specialized search engines. When a
business person searches the Web through a search engine or a directory, that
person is considered to be in "hunt mode". Marketers understand that this hunt
mode means the searcher may very well be somewhere in the buying cycle. That
makes search engine results some of the best sources of targeted traffic,
whether that traffic originates from "organic" unpaid search listings or paid
advertising listings.

To take advantage of this phenomenon some sites have combined vertical search
with comparison shopping (e.g. thefind.com, ninjatickets.com). This enhances
the quality of traffic originating from these sites, as well as the "power" of
the search engine itself.

Vertical search engines unite the motivations of the ad space buyer (to be
exposed to a targeted audience) with those of the user (to be able to search
across an entire vertical market). In achieving these goals, it allows users
to collaborate in reviewing search results, and buyers to collaborate in
attaining better ranking in universal search engine like Google, and thus
lowering their cost of online ad spend.

"Vertical search providers will play an important role in the paid search
market in the next five years," said Zia Wigder, vice president and research
director at JupiterResearch, a division of JupiterMedia. "Search marketers
must establish a robust management strategy and an efficient testing and
inclusion process to profit from this growth."

## [edit] Growth in vertical search

Advertisers on vertical sites are able to reach potential customers who are
much closer to making a purchase decision than the average user on Google or
Yahoo, according to Greg Sterling, an analyst with The Kelsey Group. He told
Forbes.com that thatâs the whole motivation for advertising on vertical
sites. For example, he said someone doing a search on Edmunds.com, an
automobile search engine, is probably more serious about buying a car than
someone doing a car search on a general search engine. The cost of advertising
on the large search engines is also likely to drive more marketers to vertical
search.

## [edit] Vertical Search Examples

Travel

  * [1]Kayak.com

Jobs  

  * [2]Indeed.com
  * [3]SimplyHired.com

Recipes  

  * [4]RecipeBridge.com

Wine  

  * [5]Snooth.com

ASP.NET  

  * [6]AspNetQuest.com

Stock Market  

  * [7]StockTraderSearch.com

Products  

  * [8]Google Products

Biomedical  

  * [9]VADLO.com

## [edit] Vertical search design and advertising models

In terms of design and implementation, several models are emerging in vertical
search:

  * The vertical search engine as a destination or portal. Often media companies that own these destination sites optimize them and buy keywords on Google to drive their audience to visit.
  * Vertical search as a complementary Web site application: This model entails embedding a search engine box on an existing, already trafficked site. One example is CertMag.com.
  * Parametric search: This tool, more prevalent in engineering and other product-specific, information-intensive, procurement-driven industries, often allows for side-by-side product and manufacturer comparison.

In terms of revenue that these vertical search engines generate, a variety of
advertising programs are gaining favor, including:

  * Cost per click, in which the advertiser pays only for each time that a user clicks on the ad.
  * Cost per thousand/cost per impression/cost per view, the standardized, traditional method of online advertising, is now emerging as an option in vertical search environments.
  * Cost per action, an emerging model in which the advertiser pays, not on click, or for impressions, but only if the consumer performs a specific action, such as purchases a good.
  * Flat fee/fixed fee, the most popular early ad model for most of the vertical search engines.
  * Web order entry/self-service, a system whereby marketers can buy, monitor and revise their ad campaigns themselves simply by entering their credit card information through a password-protected interface.
  * Paid inclusion, the practice of inserting âeditorial-likeâ ads or more traditional ads into the actual organic search results.
  * Paid listing, in which ads appear on top of or beside organic listings and are clearly identified as sponsored links.
  * Free, plus, in which the site is completely free for both those listing and those searching, with additional features available for those who pay.

## [edit] See also

  * List of search engines
  * Focused crawler
  * Category:Domain specific search engines

## [edit] References

  

  * âEngine Selection Strategies: Campaign Expansion Demands Management Tools,â JupiterResearch, 2005
  * âNew Search Engines Narrowing Their Focus,â Verne Kopytoff, San Francisco Chronicle, April 4, 2005
  * âThe State of Search Engine Marketing 2005,â SEMPO, 2006
  * âStraight Up: One-Stop Search,â Tom Taulli, Forbes.com, January 18, 2006
  * âVertical Search for Health Gets Sexy,â Health IT World News, October 5, 2006
  * âVertical Search Market Quickly Becoming Crowded,â Keith Regan, E-Commerce Times, April 4, 2005

## [edit] External links

v â¢ d â¢ e

Internet search  
Types

Web search engine (List) Â· Collaborative search engine Â· Metasearch engine  
Activities and uses

Local search Â· Vertical search Â· Search engine marketing Â· Search engine
optimization Â· Search oriented architecture Â· Selection-based search Â·
Social search Â· Document retrieval Â· Text mining Â· Web crawler Â·
Multisearch Â· Federated search Â· Search aggregator Â· Index/Web indexing Â·
Focused crawler Â· Spider trap Â· Robots exclusion standard Â· Distributed web
crawling Â· Web archiving Â· Website mirroring software Â· Web search query Â·
Voice search Â· Human flesh search engine Â· Image search Â· Video search
engine Â· Enterprise search Â· Semantic search Â· Natural language search
engine Â· Web query classification  
Protocols and standards

Z39.50 Â· Search/Retrieve Web Service Â· Search/Retrieve via URL Â· OpenSearch
Â· Representational State Transfer Â· Website Parse Template  
See also

Search engine Â· Desktop search  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vertical_search"

Categories: Searching | Internet search | Internet search engines

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2007 |
All articles needing style editing | Wikipedia articles needing style editing
from December 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * RomÃ¢nÄ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 22:50 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



