
# Computational intelligence

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG> Artificial intelligence portal  
Computational intelligence (CI) is an offshoot of artificial intelligence. As
an alternative to GOFAI it rather relies on heuristic algorithms such as in
fuzzy systems, neural networks and evolutionary computation. In addition,
computational intelligence also embraces techniques that use Swarm
intelligence, Fractals and Chaos Theory, Artificial immune systems, Wavelets,
etc.

Computational intelligence combines elements of learning, adaptation,
evolution and Fuzzy logic (rough sets) to create programs that are, in some
sense, intelligent. Computational intelligence research does not reject
statistical methods, but often gives a complementary view (as is the case with
fuzzy systems). Artificial neural networks is a branch of computational
intelligence that is closely related to machine learning.

Computational intelligence is further closely associated with soft computing,
connectionist systems and cybernetics.

## Contents

  * 1 The Computational Intelligence Societies
  * 2 References
  * 3 See also
  * 4 External links
    * 4.1 Journals
    * 4.2 Software
    * 4.3 Organizations

  
## [edit] The Computational Intelligence Societies

The Computational Intelligence Society (CIS) was established in 2004 (as a
name change to the Neural Network society) and is one of the fastest growing
societies within the IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers).
Subjects in computational intelligence as defined by IEEE Computational
Intelligence Society are:

  * Neural networks
  * Fuzzy systems
  * Evolutionary computation, including: genetic algorithms and genetic programming
  * Swarm intelligence, including particle swarm optimization

The International Society of Intelligent Biological Medicine (ISIBM) aims to
use CI to solve biomedical problems. ISIBM hosts annual meeting of IJCBS, the
International Journal of Functional Informatics and Personalized Medicine
(IJFIPM) and the International Journal of Computational Biology and Drug
Design (IJCBDD).

## [edit] References

  * Computational Intelligence: An Introduction by Andries Engelbrecht. Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-470-84870-7
  * Computational Intelligence: A Logical Approach by David Poole, Alan Mackworth, Randy Goebel. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-510270-3

## [edit] See also

  * Simulated annealing
  * Machine learning
  * Artificial immune systems
  * Expert systems
  * Hybrid intelligent systems
  * Hybrid logic
  * Simulated reality
  * Soft computing
  * Bayesian networks
  * Chaos theory
  * Ant colony optimization
  * Particle swarm optimisation
  * Cognitive robotics
  * Developmental robotics
  * Evolutionary robotics
  * Intelligent agents
  * Knowledge-Based Engineering
  * Theory-based_Semantics
  * Type-2 fuzzy sets and systems

Remotely related topics:

  * Bioinformatics and Bioengineering
  * Autonomous mental development
  * Computational finance and Computational economics
  * Intelligent systems
  * Emergent technologies
  * Data mining
  * Concept Mining

## [edit] External links

### [edit] Journals

  * Computational Intelligence Journal
  * International Journal of Computational Intelligence
  * International Journal of Intelligent Technology
  * International Journal of Computational Intelligence Research
  * International Journal of Functional Informatics and Personalized Medicine (IJFIPM)
  * International Journal of Computational Biology and Drug Design (IJCBDD)
  * International Journal of Intelligent Systems

### [edit] Software

  * Computational Intelligence Library (CILib)
  * OAT (Optimization Algorithm Toolkit): A set of standard computational intelligence optimization algorithms and problems in Java.

### [edit] Organizations

  * The Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning Virtual Community

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational_intelligence"

Categories: Artificial intelligence

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 12:16 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



