
# Service level agreement

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline
citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies.
(April 2007)  
A service level agreement (frequently abbreviated as SLA) is a part of a
service contract where the level of service is formally defined. In practice,
the term SLA is sometimes used to refer to the contracted delivery time (of
the service) or performance.

## Contents

  * 1 Description
  * 2 Common metrics
  * 3 Typical contents
  * 4 In outsourcing
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References

  
## [edit] Description

A service-level agreement (SLA) is a negotiated agreement between two parties
where one is the customer and the other is the service provider. This can be a
legally binding formal or informal 'contract' (see internal department
relationships). Contracts between the service provider and other third parties
are often (incorrectly) called SLAs â as the level of service has been set
by the (principal) customer there can be no 'agreement' between third parties
(these agreements are simply a 'contract').

The SLA records a common understanding about services, priorities,
responsibilities, guarantees and warranties. Each area of service scope should
have the 'level of service' defined. The SLA may specify the levels of
availability, serviceability, performance, operation, or other attributes of
the service such as billing. The 'level of service' can also be specified as
'target' and 'minimum', which allows customers to informed what to expect (the
minimum), whilst providing a measurable (average) target value that shows the
level of organisation performance. In some contracts penalties may be agreed
in the case of non compliance of the SLA (but see 'internal' customers
below).It is important to note that the 'agreement' relates to the services
the customer receives, and not how the service provider delivers that service.

SLAs have been used since late 1980s by fixed line telecom operators as part
of their contracts with their corporate customers. This practice has spread
such that now it is common for a customer to engage a service provider by
including a service-level agreement in a wide range of service contracts, in
practically all industries and markets. Internal departments in larger
organisations (such as IT, HR and Real Estate) have adopted the idea of using
service-level agreements with their 'internal' customers â users in other
departments within the same organisation. One benefit of this can be to enable
the quality of service to be benchmarked with that agreed across multiple
locations or between different business units. This internal benchmarking can
also be used to market test and provide a value comparison between an in-house
department and an external service provider.

Service-level agreements are by their nature 'output' based - the result of
the service as received by the customer is the subject of the 'agreement'. The
(expert) service provider can demonstrate their value by organising themselves
with ingenuity, capability and knowledge to deliver the service required,
perhaps in an innovative way. Organisations can also specify the way the
service is to be delivered, through a specification (a service-level
specification) and using subordinate 'objectives' other than those related to
the level of service. This type of agreement is known as an 'input' SLA. This
latter type of requirement has become obsolete as organisations become more
demanding and shift the delivery methodology risk on to the service provider.

## [edit] Common metrics

Service-level agreements can contain numerous service performance metrics with
corresponding service level objectives. A common case in IT Service Management
is a call center or service desk. Metrics commonly agreed to in these cases
include:

  * ABA (Abandonment Rate): Percentage of calls abandoned while waiting to be answered.
  * ASA (Average Speed to Answer): Average time (usually in seconds) it takes for a call to be answered by the service desk.
  * TSF (Time Service Factor): Percentage of calls answered within a definite timeframe, e.g. 80% in 20 seconds.
  * FCR (First Call Resolution): Percentage of incoming calls that can be resolved without the use of a callback, or without having the caller call back the helpdesk to finish resolving the case.
  * TAT (Turn Around Time): Time taken to complete a certain task.

Uptime Agreements are another very common metric, often used for data services
such as shared hosting, virtual private servers and dedicated servers. Common
agreements include percentage of network uptime, power uptime, amount of
scheduled maintenance windows etc.

Many SLAs track to the ITIL specifications when applied to IT services.

## [edit] Typical contents

SLAs commonly include segments to address: a definition of services;
performance measurement; problem management; customer duties; warranties;
disaster recovery; termination of agreement.[1]

## [edit] In outsourcing

Outsourcing involves the transfer of responsibility from an organization to a
supplier.The management of this new arrangement is through a contract that may
include a Service Level Agreement (SLA).The contract may involve financial
penalties and the right to terminate if SLAs are consistently missed. Setting,
tracking and managing SLAs is an important part of Outsourcing Relationship
Management (ORM) discipline. It is typical that specific SLAs are negotiated
up front as part of the outsourcing contract and they are utilized as one of
the primary tools of outsourcing governance.

## [edit] See also

  * SLA@SOI FP7 Project

## [edit] References

  1. ^ An outline of the core elements of an SLA. The Service Level Agreement.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Service_level_agreement"

Categories: Contract law | Information technology management | Outsourcing

Hidden categories: Articles with unsourced statements since April 2007 | All
articles with unsourced statements

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * O'zbek
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 09:47.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



