
# Baddeley's model of working memory

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

Schematic of Baddeley's Model

Alan Baddeley and Graham Hitch proposed a Model of Working Memory in 1974, in
an attempt to describe a more accurate model of short-term memory.

Baddeley & Hitch proposed their tripartite working memory model as an
alternative to the short-term store in Atkinson & Shiffrin's 'multi-store'
memory model (1968). This model is later expanded upon by Baddeley and other
co-workers and has become the dominant view in the field of working memory.
However, alternative models are developing (see working memory) providing a
different perspective on the working memory system.

The original model of Baddeley & Hitch was composed of three main components;
the central executive which acts as supervisory system and controls the flow
of information from and to its slave systems: the phonological loop and the
visuo-spatial sketchpad. The slave systems are short-term storage systems
dedicated to a content domain (verbal and visuo-spatial, respectively). In
2000 Baddeley added a third slave system to his model; the episodic buffer.

Baddeley & Hitch's argument for the distinction of two domain-specific slave
systems in the older model was derived from experimental findings with dual-
task paradigms. Performance of two simultaneous tasks requiring the use of two
separate perceptual domains (i.e. a visual and a verbal task) is nearly as
efficient as performance of the tasks individually. In contrast, when a person
tries to carry out two tasks simultaneously that use the same perceptual
domain, performance is less efficient than when performing the tasks
individually.

## Contents

  * 1 Components
    * 1.1 Central executive
    * 1.2 Phonological loop
    * 1.3 Visuospatial sketchpad
      * 1.3.1 Logie's elaboration of the visuospatial sketchpad
    * 1.4 Episodic buffer
  * 2 Validity of the model
  * 3 References
    * 3.1 Notes
    * 3.2 Bibliography
  * 4 See also

  
## [edit] Components

### [edit] Central executive

The central executive is a flexible system responsible for the control and
regulation of cognitive processes. It has the following functions:  

  * binding information from a number of sources into coherent episodes
  * coordination of the slave systems
  * shifting between tasks or retrieval strategies
  * selective attention and inhibition

It can be thought of as a supervisory system that controls cognitive processes
and intervenes when they go astray.

Using the dual-task paradigm, Baddeley and colleagues have found, for
instance, that patients with Alzheimer's dementia are impaired when performing
multiple tasks simultaneously, even when the difficulty of the individual
tasks is adapted to their abilities.[1]

Recent research on executive functions suggests that the 'central' executive
is not as central as conceived in the Baddeley & Hitch model. Rather, there
seem to be separate executive functions that can vary largely independently
between individuals and can be selectively impaired or spared by brain
damage.[2]

### [edit] Phonological loop

The phonological loop (or "articulatory loop") as a whole deals with sound or
phonological information. It consists of two parts: a short-term phonological
store with auditory memory traces that are subject to rapid decay and an
articulatory rehearsal component that can revive the memory traces.

Any auditory verbal information is assumed to enter automatically into the
phonological store. Visually presented language can be transformed into
phonological code by silent articulation and thereby be encoded into the
phonological store. This transformation is facilitated by the articulatory
control process. The phonological store acts as an 'inner ear', remembering
speech sounds in their temporal order, whilst the articulatory process acts as
an 'inner voice' and repeats the series of words (or other speech elements) on
a loop to prevent them from decaying. The phonological loop may play a key
role in the acquisition of vocabulary, particularly in the early childhood
years.[3] It may also be vital for learning a second language.

Five main findings provide evidence for the phonological loop:

  1. The effect of phonological similarity:  
Lists of words that sound similar are more difficult to remember than words
that sound different. Semantic similarity (similarity of meaning) has
comparatively little effect, supporting the assumption that verbal information
is coded largely phonologically in working memory.[4]

  2. The effect of articulatory suppression:  
Memory for verbal material is impaired when people are asked to say something
irrelevant aloud. This is assumed to block the articulatory rehearsal process,
thereby leaving memory traces in the phonological loop to decay.[5]

  3. Transfer of information between codes:  
With visually presented items, adults usually name and sub-vocally rehearse
them, so the information is transferred from a visual to an auditory code.
Articulatory suppression prevents this transfer, and in that case the above
mentioned effect of phonological similarity is erased for visually presented
items.[6]

  4. Neuropsychological evidence:  
A defective phonological store explains the behavior of patients with a
specific deficit in phonological short-term memory. Aphasic patients with
dyspraxia are unable to set up the speech motor codes necessary for
articulation, caused by a deficiency of the articulatory rehearsal process.[7]

  5. On the other hand, patients with dysarthria, whose speech problems are secondary, show a normal capacity for rehearsal. This suggests that it is the subvocal rehearsing that is crucial.[8]

### [edit] Visuospatial sketchpad

The visuospatial sketchpad is assumed to hold information about what we see.
It is used in the temporary storage and manipulation of spatial and visual
information, such as remembering shapes and colours, or the location or speed
of objects in space. It is also involved in tasks which involve planning of
spatial movements, like planning one's way through a complex building. The
visuospatial sketchpad can be divided into separate visual, spatial and
possibly kinaesthetic (movement) components. It is principally represented
within the right hemisphere of the brain.[9]

#### [edit] Logie's elaboration of the visuospatial sketchpad

Logie has proposed that the visuospatial sketchpad can be further subdivided
into two components:

  1. The visual cache, which stores information about form and color.
  2. The inner scribe, which deals with spatial and movement information. It also rehearses information in the visual cache and transfers information to the central executive.[10]

Three main findings provide evidence for the distinction between visual and
spatial parts of the visuospatial sketchpad:

  1. There is less interference between visual and spatial tasks than between two visual tasks or two spatial tasks.[11]
  2. Brain damage can influence one of the components without influencing the other.[12]
  3. Results from brain-imaging show that working memory tasks with visual objects activate mostly areas in the left hemisphere, whereas tasks with spatial information activate more areas in the right hemisphere.[13]

### [edit] Episodic buffer

In 2000 Baddeley added a fourth component to the model, called the 'episodic
buffer'. This component is a third slave system, dedicated to linking
information across domains to form integrated units of visual, spatial, and
verbal information with time sequencing (or chronological ordering), such as
the memory of a story or a movie scene. The episodic buffer is also assumed to
have links to long-term memory and semantical meaning.  

The main motivation for introducing this component was the observation that
some (in particular, highly intelligent) patients with amnesia, who presumably
have no ability to encode new information in long-term memory, nevertheless
have good short-term recall of stories, recalling much more information than
could be held in the phonological loop.[14]

## [edit] Validity of the model

The strength of Baddeley's model is its ability to integrate a large amount of
findings from work on short-term and working memory. Additionally, the
mechanisms of the slave systems, especially the phonological loop, has
inspired a wealth of research in experimental psychology, neuropsychology, and
cognitive neuroscience.

However, criticisms have been raised, for instance of the phonological-loop
component, because some details of the findings are not easily explained by
the original Baddeley & Hitch model.[15][16]

The episodic buffer is seen as a helpful addition to the model of working
memory, but it has not been investigated extensively and its functions remain
unclear.[17]

## [edit] References

### [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Baddeley, A. D., & Della Sala, S. (1996). Working memory and executive control. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 351, 1397-1404.
  2. ^ Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H., Howerter, A., & Wager, T. D. (2000). The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex "frontal lobe" tasks: A latent variable analysis. Cognitive Psychology, 41, 49-100.
  3. ^ Baddeley, A. D., Gathercole, S. E., & Papagno, C. (1998). The phonological loop as a language learning device. Psychological Review, 105, 158â173.
  4. ^ a) Conrad. R. & Hull, A.J. (1964) Information, acoustic confusion and memory span. British Journal of Psychology. 55, 429â432.  
b) Baddeley, A.D. (1966) Short-term memory for word sequences as a function of
acoustic, semantic and formal similarity. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology 18, 362â365.

  5. ^ Baddeley, A.D. et al. (1975). Word length and the structure of short-term memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 14, 575â589.
  6. ^ Murray, D.J. (1968). Articulation and acoustic confusability in short term memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology 78, 679â684
  7. ^ Waters, G.F. et al. (1992). The role of high-level speech planning in rehearsal: Evidence from patients with apraxia of speech. Journal of Memory and Language 31, 54â73.
  8. ^ Baddeley, A.D. & Wilson, B.A. (1985). Phonological coding and shortterm memory in patients without speech. Journal of Memory and Language 24, 490â502.
  9. ^ Baddeley, A.D. (2000). The episodic buffer: A new component of working memory? Trends in Cognitive Science, 4, 417-423.
  10. ^ Logie, R.H.(1995). Visuo-spatial working memory, Hove, UK: Lawrence Eribaum Associates.
  11. ^ Klauer, K. C., & Zhao, Z. (2004). Double dissociations in visual and spatial short-term memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 355â381.
  12. ^ mentioned in: http://www.psypress.com/ek5/resources/demo_ch06-sc-02.asp
  13. ^ Smith, E. E., & Jonides, J. (1997).
  14. ^ Baddeley, A. D., & Wilson, B. A.(2002). Prose recall and amnesia: implications for the structure of working memory. Neuropsychologia, 40, 1737-1743.
  15. ^ Jones, D. M., Macken, W. J., & Nicholls, A. P. (2004). The phonological store of working memory: is it phonological and is it a store? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 656-674.
  16. ^ Nairne, J. S. (2002). Remembering over the short-term: The case against the standard model. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 53-81.
  17. ^ Cognitive Psychology: A Student's Handbook :: 5th Edition: Chapter Topic

### [edit] Bibliography

  * Baddeley, A.D., & Wilson, B. A. (2002). Prose recall and amnesia: implications for the structure of working memory. Neuropsychologia, 40, 1737-1743.
  * Baddeley, A.D. (2000). The episodic buffer: a new component of working memory? Trends in Cognitive Science, 4, 417-423.
  * Baddeley, A.D., & Della Sala, S. (1996). Working memory and executive control. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 351, 1397-1404.
  * Baddeley, A.D., & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. In G.H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory (Vol. 8, pp. 47--89). New York: Academic Press.

## [edit] See also

  * Working memory
  * Attention versus memory in prefrontal cortex
  * Echoic memory
  * The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two

Retrieved from
"http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baddeley%27s_model_of_working_memory"

Categories: Memory processes

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Magyar

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 10 March 2009, at 11:11.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



