
# Purchasing power parity

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article
or discuss these issues on the talk page.

  * It may need a complete rewrite to meet Wikipedia's quality standards.Tagged since December 2008.  

  * It may require general cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Tagged since October 2008.  

  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) of Gross Domestic Product for the countries of
the world as of 2003. The economy of the United States is used as a reference,
so that country is set at 100. Bermuda has the highest index value, 154, thus
goods sold in Bermuda are 54% more expensive than in the United States.

The purchasing power parity (PPP) theory uses the long-term equilibrium
exchange rate of two currencies to equalize their purchasing power. Developed
by Gustav Cassel in 1920, it is based on the law of one price: the theory
states that, in ideally efficient markets, identical goods should have only
one price.

This purchasing power SEM rate equalizes the purchasing power of different
currencies in their home countries for a given basket of goods. Using a PPP
basis is arguably more useful when comparing differences in living standards
on the whole between nations because PPP takes into account the relative cost
of living and the inflation rates of different countries, rather than just a
nominal gross domestic product (GDP) comparison. The best-known and most-used
purchasing power parity exchange rate is the Geary-Khamis dollar (the
"international dollar").

PPP exchange rates (the "real exchange rate") fluctuations are mostly due to
market exchange rates movements. Aside from this volatility, consistent
deviations of the market and PPP exchange rates are observed, for example
(market exchange rate) prices of non-traded goods and services are usually
lower where incomes are lower. (A U.S. dollar exchanged and spent in India
will buy more haircuts than a dollar spent in the United States). PPP takes
into account this lower cost of living and adjusts for it as though all income
was spent locally. In other words, PPP is the amount of a certain basket of
basic goods which can be bought in the given country with the money it
produces.

There can be marked differences between PPP and market exchange rates. [1] For
example, the World Bank's World Development Indicators 2005 estimated that in
2003, one United States dollar was equivalent to about 1.8 Chinese yuan by
purchasing power parity [2] â considerably different from the nominal
exchange rate that put one dollar equal to 7.6 yuan. This discrepancy has
large implications; for instance, GDP per capita in the People's Republic of
China is about US$1,800 while on a PPP basis it is about US$7,204. This is
frequently used to assert that China is the world's second-largest economy,
but such a calculation would only be valid under the PPP theory. At the other
extreme, Japan's nominal GDP per capita is around US$37,600, but its PPP
figure is only US$30,615.

## Contents

  * 1 Explanation
    * 1.1 Relative PPP
    * 1.2 PPP equalization and the law of one price
  * 2 PPP measurement
    * 2.1 Big Mac Index
    * 2.2 iPod Index
  * 3 West and Central African Franc
  * 4 Need for PPP adjustments to GDP
  * 5 Difficulties
    * 5.1 Range and quality of goods
  * 6 Difficulties with PPP comparisons in welfare economics
  * 7 Clarification to PPP Numbers of the IMF
  * 8 See also
  * 9 Notes
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Explanation

PPP is: Â£P ($/Â£)= $P This implies that the exchange rate that equalizes the
value of a dollar of purchasing power (the PPP exchange rate) is:

    ($/Â£)= $P/Â£P
If the actual spot rate is greater, it suggests that the Â£ is over-valued
against the $. If the actual spot rate is less, it suggests that the $ is
over-valued against the Â£.

For example if a "representative" consumption basket costs $1,500 in the U.S.
and Â£1,000 in the UK the PPP exchange rate would be $1.50/Â£. If the actual
spot rate was $1.80/Â£ this would indicate that the pound is overvalued by
20%, or equivalently the dollar is undervalued by 16.7%.

### [edit] Relative PPP

Purchasing power parity is often called absolute purchasing power parity to
distinguish it from a related theory relative purchasing power parity, which
predicts the relationship between the two countries' relative inflation rates
and the change in the exchange rate of their currencies.

Relative PPP relates the inflation rate (the change of price levels) in each
country to the change in the market exchange rate.

\\frac{S_t}{S_{t-1}}=\\frac{P_{t}^*/P_{t-1}^*}{P_{t}/P_{t-1}},

where St is the spot rate in Foreign Currency/Domestic Currency and Pt is the
price level in period t (foreign values are marked by an asterisk). This
relation is necessary but not sufficient for absolute purchasing power parity.

According to this theory, the change in the exchange rate is determined by
price level changes in both countries. For example, if prices in the United
States rise by 3% and prices in the European Union rise by 1% the purchasing
power of the EUR should appreciate by 2% compared to the purchasing power of
the USD (equivalently the USD will depreciate by about 2%).

Note that it is incorrect to do the calculation by subtracting percentages -
one must use the above formula, getting 1.01/1.03 = .98, i.e. a 2%
depreciation of the USD. With larger price rises, the difference between the
incorrect and the correct formula becomes larger.

### [edit] PPP equalization and the law of one price

The law of one price states that differing prices of a traded good will tend
to equalize in the absence of tariffs, other barriers to trade and
prohibitively high shipping rates. The law of one price can also be stated as:
"In an efficient market all identical goods must have only one price."

The PPP hypothesis is that free trade of goods will align exchange rates with
their PPP values. However, econometric analysis rejects this hypothesis, and
gives a better prediction of the PPP/exchange rate relationship (the CPI)
based on relative GDPs. Neo-classical economics includes Balassa-Samuelson
effect theory, which explains the PPP model adjustment giving the equilibrium
CPIs.

## [edit] PPP measurement

The PPP exchange-rate calculation is controversial because of the difficulties
of finding comparable baskets of goods to compare purchasing power across
countries.

Estimation of purchasing power parity is complicated by the fact that
countries do not simply differ in a uniform price level; rather, the
difference in food prices may be greater than the difference in housing
prices, while also less than the difference in entertainment prices. People in
different countries typically consume different baskets of goods. It is
necessary to compare the cost of baskets of goods and services using a price
index. This is a difficult task because purchasing patterns and even the goods
available to purchase differ across countries. Thus, it is necessary to make
adjustments for differences in the quality of goods and services. Additional
statistical difficulties arise with multilateral comparisons when (as is
usually the case) more than two countries are to be compared.

When PPP comparisons are to be made over some interval of time, proper account
needs to be made of inflationary effects.

### [edit] Big Mac Index

An example of one measure of PPP is the Big Mac Index popularised by The
Economist, which looks at the prices of a Big Mac burger in McDonald's
restaurants in different countries. If a Big Mac costs USD$4 in the U.S. and
GBPÂ£3 in Britain, the PPP exchange rate would be Â£3 for $4. The Big Mac
Index is presumably useful because it is based on a well-known good whose
final price, easily tracked in many countries, includes input costs from a
wide range of sectors in the local economy, such as agricultural commodities
(beef, bread, lettuce, tomatoes), labour (blue and white collar), advertising,
rent and real estate costs, transportation, etc. The Big Mac Index is
inaccurate in certain cases because of the different market conditions that
exist in differing McDonald's locations. For instance, a Big Mac in downtown
Chicago is likely to be priced higher than one in Wisconsin. Such pricing
differences existing in one country demonstrate the imperfection of the Big
Mac Index. In addition, in some emerging economies western fast food
represents an expensive niche product price well above the price of
traditional staples - i.e. the Big Mac is not a mainstream 'cheap' meal as it
is in the west but a luxury import for the middle classes and foreigners.
Although it is not perfect, the index still offers significant insight and an
easy to understand example of PPP.

### [edit] iPod Index

The Australian securities firm CommSec introduced the iPod Index[3] as a
light-hearted method of measuring PPP. Unlike the Big Mac, which is affected
by local labour and transport costs, the iPod manufacturing costs are the same
and the iPod is a tradeable commodity.

## [edit] West and Central African Franc

In 2003, the U.S. Dollar bought on average about 550 CFA franc. Because of a
difference in purchasing power within some of the regions using the CFA franc,
their purchasing power parity exchange rate differed greatly (lower implies a
stronger currency): Cameroon 240, Central African Republic 166, Chad 172,
Republic of the Congo 677, Equatorial Guinea 114, Gabon 413, Benin 273,
Burkina Faso 167.

## [edit] Need for PPP adjustments to GDP

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gross domestic product (by purchasing power parity) in 2006

Using market exchange rates to compare countries' standard of living or per
capita Gross Domestic Product can give a very misleading picture. The exchange
rate only reflects traded goods in contrast to non-traded ones. Also,
currencies are traded for purposes other than trade in goods and services,
e.g., to buy capital assets whose prices vary more than those of physical
goods. Also, different interest rates, speculation, hedging or interventions
by central banks can influence the foreign-exchange market.

The PPP method is used as an alternative.

For example, if the value of the Mexican peso falls by half compared to the
U.S. dollar, the Mexican Gross Domestic Product measured in dollars will also
halve. However, this exchange rate results from international trade and
financial markets. It does not necessarily mean that Mexicans are poorer by a
half; if incomes and prices measured in pesos stay the same, they will be no
worse off assuming that imported goods are not essential to the quality of
life of individuals. Measuring income in different countries using PPP
exchange rates helps to avoid this problem.

PPP exchange rates are especially useful when official exchange rates are
artificially manipulated by governments. Countries with strong government
control of the economy sometimes enforce official exchange rates that make
their own currency artificially strong. By contrast, the currency's black
market exchange rate is artificially weak. In such cases a PPP exchange rate
is likely the most realistic basis for economic comparison.

## [edit] Difficulties

The main reasons why different measures do not perfectly reflect standards of
living are

  * PPP numbers can vary with the specific basket of goods used, making it a rough estimate.
  * Differences in quality of goods are not sufficiently reflected in PPP.

PPP calculations are often used to measure poverty rates. For problems with
this methodology, see How Not To Count The Poor.

### [edit] Range and quality of goods

The goods that the currency has the "power" to purchase are a basket of goods
of different types:

  1. Local, non-tradable goods and services (like electric power) that are produced and sold domestically.
  2. Tradable goods such as non-perishable commodities that can be sold on the international market (e.g. diamonds).

The more a product falls into category 1 the further its price will be from
the currency exchange rate. (Moving towards the PPP exchange rate.)
Conversely, category 2 products tend to trade close to the currency exchange
rate. (For more details of why, see: Penn effect).

More processed and expensive products are likely to be tradable, falling into
the second category, and drifting from the PPP exchange rate to the currency
exchange rate. Even if the PPP "value" of the Chinese currency is five times
stronger than the currency exchange rate, it won't buy five times as much of
internationally traded goods like steel, cars and microchips, but non-traded
goods like housing, services ("haircuts"), and domestically produced rice. The
relative price differential between tradables and non-tradables from high-
income to low-income countries is a consequence of the Balassa-Samuelson
effect, and gives a big cost advantage to labour intensive production of
tradable goods in low income countries (like China), as against high income
countries (like Switzerland). The corporate cost advantage is nothing more
sophisticated than access to cheaper workers, but because the pay of those
workers goes further in low-income countries than high, the relative pay
differentials (inter-country) can be sustained for longer than would be the
case otherwise. (This is another way of saying that the wage rate is based on
average local productivity, and that this is below the per capita productivity
that factories selling tradable goods to international markets can achieve.
This is sometimes called exploitation.) An equivalent cost benefit comes from
non-traded goods that can be sourced locally (nearer the PPP-exchange rate
than the nominal exchange rate in which receipts are paid). These act as a
relatively cheaper factor of production than is available to factories in
richer countries.

PPP calculations tend to overemphasise the primary sectoral contribution and
underemphasise the industrial and service sectoral contributions to the
economy of a nation.

## [edit] Difficulties with PPP comparisons in welfare economics

While using PPP exchange rates for income comparison is an improvement over
using market exchange rates, it is still imperfect, and comparisons using the
PPP method can still be misleading. Comparing standards of living using the
PPP method implicitly assumes that the real value placed on goods is the same
in different countries. In reality, what is considered a luxury in one culture
could be considered a necessity in another. The PPP method does not account
for this. (This is not primarily a flaw in the exchange rate methodology, as
cultural and interpersonal differences in utility functions are a more
fundamental microeconomic problem.)

A PPP exchange rate varies depending on the choice of goods used for the index
(CPI). Hence, it is possible to deliberately or accidentally bias a PPP
exchange rate by the choice of a bundle. Indeed, it may be hard to construct
equivalent representative bundles for the consumption habits of very different
societies. PPP could also have difficulty accounting for differences in
quality between goods in one country and equivalent goods in another, see:
consumer price index.

## [edit] Clarification to PPP Numbers of the IMF

The GDP number for all reporting areas are one number in the reporting areas
local currency. Therefore, in the local currency the PPP and market (or
government) exchange rate is always 1.0 to its own currency, so the PPP and
market exchange rate GDP number is always per definition the same for any
duration of time, anytime, in that area's currency. The only time the PPP
exchange rate and the market exchange rate can differ is when the GDP number
is converted into another currency.

Only because of different base numbers (because of for example "current" or
"constant" prices, or an annualized or averaged number) are the USD to USD PPP
exchange rate not 1.0, see the IMF data here: [1]. The PPP exchange rate is
1.023 from 1980 to 2002, and the "constant" and "current" price is the same in
2000, because that's the base year for the "constant" (inflation adjusted)
currency.

## [edit] See also

  * Big Mac Index
  * International dollar
  * List of countries by GDP (PPP)
  * List of countries by GDP (nominal)
  * List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita
  * List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita
  * Measures of national income and output
  * Penn effect
  * Karl Gustav Cassel
  * Geary-Khamis dollar

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ FT.com / World - China, India economies â40% smallerâ:By Scheherazade Daneshkhu in London Published: December 18 2007 18:04
  2. ^ 2005 World Development Indicators: Table 5.7 | Relative prices and exchange rates
  3. ^ News

## [edit] External links

  * Penn World Table
  * Explanations from the U. of British Columbia (also provides daily updated PPP charts)
  * OECD Purchasing Power Parity estimates updated annually by the Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD)
  * World Bank International Comparison Project provides PPP estimates for a large number of countries
  * UBS's "Prices and Earnings" Report 2006Good report on purchasing power containing a Big Mac index as well as for staples such as bread and rice for 71 world cities.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Purchasing_power_parity"

Categories: Economic indicators | Index numbers | International economics |
Gross Domestic Product

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing rewrite | Cleanup from December
2008 | Cleanup from October 2008 | All pages needing cleanup

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¬ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¦ÞÞ°
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * àº¥àº²àº§
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * Magyar
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡Ð°Ñ Ð° ÑÑÐ»Ð°
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 25 March 2009, at 18:17.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



