
# Knowledge worker

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2009)  
<IMG>

This article is written like a personal reflection or essay and may require
cleanup. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style.
(April 2009)  
A knowledge worker in today's workforce is an individual that is valued for
their ability to interpret information within a specific subject area. They
will often advance the overall understanding of that subject through focused
analysis, design and/or development. They use research skills to define
problems and to identify alternatives. Fueled by their expertise and insight,
they work to solve those problems, in an effort to influence company
decisions, priorities and strategies.

Knowledge workers may be found across a variety of information technology
roles, but also among professionals like teachers, lawyers, architects,
doctors, nurses, engineers and scientists. As businesses increase their
dependence on information technology, the number of fields in which knowledge
workers must operate has expanded dramatically.

## Contents

  * 1 Historical evolution of the concept
  * 2 Knowledge work in the 21st century
  * 3 Knowledge worker roles
  * 4 Additional context and frameworks
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Historical evolution of the concept

The term was first coined by Peter Drucker ca. 1959, as one who works
primarily with information or one who develops and uses knowledge in the
workplace.

Weiss (1960) said that knowledge grows like organisms, with data serving as
food to be assimilated rather than merely stored. Popper (1963) stated there
is always an increasing need for knowledge to grow and progress continually,
whether tacit (Polanyi, 1976) or explicit.

Toffler (1990) observed that typical knowledge workers (especially R&D
scientists and engineers) in the age of knowledge economy must have some
system at their disposal to create, process and enhance their own knowledge.
In some cases they would also need to manage the knowledge of their co-
workers.

Nonaka (1991) described knowledge as the fuel for innovation, but was
concerned that many managers failed to understand how knowledge could be
leveraged. Companies are more like living organisms than machines, he argued,
and most viewed knowledge as a static input to the corporate machine. Nonaka
advocated a view of knowledge as renewable and changing, and that knowledge
workers were the agents for that change. Knowledge-creating companies, he
believed, should be focused primarily on the task of innovation.

This laid the foundation for the new practice of knowledge management, or
"KM", which evolved in the 1990âs to support knowledge workers with standard
tools and processes.

Savage (1995) describes a knowledge-focus as the third wave of human socio-
economic development. The first wave was the Agricultural Age with wealth
defined as ownership of land. In the second wave, the Industrial Age, wealth
was based on ownership of Capital, i.e. factories. In the Knowledge Age,
wealth is based upon the ownership of knowledge and the ability to use that
knowledge to create or improve goods and services. Product improvements
include cost, durability, suitability, timeliness of delivery, and security.
Using data (attributed to Ann Andrews, citation?), in the Knowledge Age, 2% of
the working population will work on the land, 10% will work in Industry and
the rest will be knowledge workers.

## [edit] Knowledge work in the 21st century

Tapscott (2006) sees a strong, on-going linkage between knowledge workers and
innovation, but the pace and manner of interaction have become more advanced.
He describes social media tools on the internet that now drive more powerful
forms of collaboration. Knowledge workers engage in ââpeer-to-peerââ
knowledge sharing across organizational and company boundaries, forming
networks of expertise. Some of these are open to the public. While he echoes
concern over copyright and intellectual property law being challenged in the
marketplace, he feels strongly that businesses must engage in collaboration to
survive. He sees on-going alliance of public (government) and private
(commercial) teams to solve problems, referencing the open source Linux
operating system along with the Human Genome Project as examples where
knowledge is being freely exchanged, with commercial value being realized.

Due to the rapid global expansion of information-based transactions and
interactions being conducted via the internet, there has been an ever-
increasing demand for a workforce that is capable of performing these
activities. Knowledge Workers are now estimated to outnumber all other workers
in North America by at least a four to one margin (Haag et al., 2006, pg.
4[1]).

While knowledge worker roles overlap heavily with professions that require
college degrees, the comprehensive nature of knowledge work in today's
\connected workplace is requiring virtually all workers to obtain these skills
at some level. To that end, the public education and community college systems
have become increasingly focused on lifelong learning to ensure students
receive skills necessary to be productive knowledge workers in the 21st
century.

## [edit] Knowledge worker roles

Knowledge workers bring benefits to organizations in a variety of important
ways. These include:

  * analyzing data to establish relationships
  * assessing input in order to evaluate complex or conflicting priorities
  * identifying and understanding trends
  * making connections
  * understanding cause and effect

  * ability to brainstorm, thinking broadly (divergent thinking)
  * ability to drill down, creating more focus (convergent thinking)
  * producing a new capability
  * creating or modifying a strategy

  
These knowledge worker contributions are in contrast with activities that they
would typically not be asked to perform, including:

  * transaction processing
  * routine tasks
  * simple prioritization of work

There is a set of transitional tasks includes roles that are seemingly
routine, but that require deep technology, product, or customer knowledge to
fulfill the function. These include:

  * providing technical or customer support
  * handling unique customer issues
  * addressing open-ended inquiries

Generally, if the knowledge can be retained, knowledge worker contributions
will serve to expand the knowledge assets of a company. While it can be
difficult to measure, this increases the overall value of its intellectual
capital. In cases where the knowledge assets have commercial or monetary
value, companies may create patents around their assets, at which point the
material becomes restricted intellectual property. In these knowledge-
intensive situations, knowledge workers play a direct, vital role in
increasing the financial value of a company.

## [edit] Additional context and frameworks

Drucker defines six factors for knowledge worker productivity (1999):

  1. Knowledge worker productivity demands that we ask the question: "What is the task?"
  2. It demands that we impose the responsibility for their productivity on the individual knowledge workers themselves. Knowledge workers have to manage themselves.
  3. Continuing innovation has to be part of the work, the task and the responsibility of knowledge workers.
  4. Knowledge work requires continuous learning on the part of the knowledge worker, but equally continuous teaching on the part of the knowledge worker.
  5. Productivity of the knowledge worker is not-at least not primarily-a matter of the quantity of output. Quality is at least as important.
  6. Finally, knowledge worker productivity requires that the knowledge worker is both seen and treated as an "asset" rather than a "cost." It requires that knowledge workers want to work for the organization in preference to all other opportunities. [2]

Another, more recent breakdown of knowledge work (author unknown) shows
activity that ranges from tasks performed by individual knowledge workers to
global social networks. This framework spans every class of knowledge work
that is being or is likely to be undertaken. There are seven levels or scales
of knowledge work, with references for each are cited.

  1. Knowledge work (e.g., writing, analyzing, advising) is performed by subject-matter specialists in all areas of an organization. Although knowledge work began with the origins of writing and counting, it was first identified as a category of work by Drucker (1973)[3].
  2. . Knowledge functions (e.g., capturing, organizing, and providing access to knowledge) are performed by technical staff, to support knowledge processes projects. Knowledge functions date from c. 450 BC, with the library of Alexandria, but their modern roots can be linked to the emergence of information management in the 1970s (Mcgee and Prusak, 1993).
  3. Knowledge processes (preserving, sharing, integration) are performed by professional groups, as part of a knowledge management program. Knowledge processes have evolved in concert with general-purpose technologies, such as the printing press, mail delivery, the telegraph, telephone networks, and the Internet[4].
  4. Knowledge management programs link the generation of knowledge (e.g., from science, synthesis, or learning) with its use (e.g., policy analysis, reporting, program management) as well as facilitating organizational learning and adaptation in a knowledge organization. Knowledge management emerged as a discipline in the 1990s (Leonard, 1995).
  5. Knowledge organizations transfer outputs (content, products, services, and solutions), in the form of knowledge services, to enable external use. The concept of knowledge organizations emerged in the 1990s (Davenport and Prusak, 1998).
  6. Knowledge services support other organizational services, yield sector outcomes, and result in benefits for citizens in the context of knowledge markets. Knowledge services emerged as a subject in the 2000s. (Simard et al., 2007).
  7. Social media networks enable knowledge organizations to co-produce knowledge outputs by leveraging their internal capacity with massive social networks. Social networking emerged in the 2000s [5]

The hierarchy ranges from the effort of individual specialists, through
technical activity, professional projects, and management programs, to
organizational strategy, knowledge markets, and global-scale networking.

This framework is useful for positioning the myriad types of knowledge work
relative to each other and within the context of organizations, markets, and
the global knowledge economy. It also provides a useful context for planning,
developing, and implementing knowledge management projects.

## [edit] See also

  * Explicit knowledge
  * Knowledge capture
  * Knowledge economy
  * Knowledge management
  * Knowledge market
  * Knowledge organization
  * Knowledge transfer

  
  * Knowledge value chain
  * Learning
  * Lifelong learning
  * Personal knowledge management
  * Social information processing
  * Systems thinking
  * Tacit knowledge

  
## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Haag, S., Cummings, M., McCubbrey, D., Pinsonneault, A., & Donovan, R. (2006). Management Information Systems For the Information Age (3rd Canadian Ed.). Canada: McGraw Hill Ryerson
  2. ^ Drucker, Peter F.. Management Challenges of the 21st Century. New York: Harper Business, 1999.
  3. ^ Drucker, Peter F, 1973. Management: Tasks, Responsibilities, Practices. Harper & Row, New York. 839 p.
  4. ^ Mumford, Lewis. 1961. The City in History. p275.
  5. ^ Tapscott, Don and Anthony D. Williams. 2006. Wikinomics. Penguin Group, New York. 324 p.

## [edit] References

  * Bil, Ton and Jean Peters (2001). De breineconomie (hardback ed.). Amsterdam: FinancialTimes Prentice Hall. ISBN 90-430-0419-7.
  * Barbrook, Richard (2006). The Class of the New (paperback ed.). London: OpenMute. ISBN 0-9550664-7-6. http://www.theclassofthenew.net.
  * Davenport, Thomas H. And Laurence Prusak. 1998. Working Knowledge. Harvard Business School press. Boston, MA. 197 p.
  * Ikujiro Nonaka (1991). âThe Knowledge Creating Companyâ, in Knowledge Management. Harvard Business School Press, 1998.
  * Leonard, Dorothy. 1993. Wellsprings of Knowledge. Harvard Business School Press, Boston MA. 334 p.
  * Alan Liu (2004). "The Laws of Cool: Knowledge Work and the Culture of Information, University of Chicago Press
  * Mcgee, James and Lawrence Prusak. 1993. Managing information Strategically. John Wiley & Sons. New York. 244 p.
  * O'Brien, James. 2006. Introduction to Information Systems, 13th ed. McGraw-Hill. Page 31.
  * Sheridan, William. 2008. How to Think Like a Knowledge Worker, United Nations Public Administration Network, New York.
  * Simard, Albert, John Broome, Malcolm Drury, Brian Haddon, Bob OâNeil, and Dave Pasho. 2007. Understanding Knowledge Services at Natural Resources Canada. 82p (in press, preprint available).
  * Thorp, John. 1998. Information Paradox. McGraw-Hill Ryerson Publishers, Toronto CN, 273 p.
  * Tapscott, Don and Anthony D. Williams. Wikinomics. 2006. Penguin Group, New York, NY. 324p.

## [edit] External links

  * How to think like a knowledge worker (UNPAN)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knowledge_worker"

Categories: Business terms | Labor | Social information processing

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2009 |
Wikipedia articles needing style editing from April 2009 | All articles
needing style editing

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Nederlands
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 17:18 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



