
# Merchant account

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline
citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies.
(January 2008)  
A merchant account is a contract under which an acquiring bank extends a line
of credit to a merchant, who wishes to accept payment card transactions of a
particular card association brand. Without such a contract, one cannot
directly accept payments by any of the major credit card brands. When using an
intermediary payment service provider (such as PayPal), the merchant account
is in fact held by the service provider itself.

## Contents

  * 1 Methods of processing credit cards
    * 1.1 Credit card terminal
    * 1.2 Automated Response Unit (ARU)
    * 1.3 Payment gateway
    * 1.4 Level 2 or Level 3 Processing - Purchasing Cards
    * 1.5 Merchant Account Marketing
    * 1.6 Marketing by Banks
    * 1.7 Marketing by Independent Sales Organization (ISO)/MSPs
  * 2 Rates and fees
    * 2.1 Discount Rates
      * 2.1.1 3-Tier Pricing
        * 2.1.1.1 Qualified rate
        * 2.1.1.2 Mid-qualified rate
        * 2.1.1.3 Non-qualified rate
      * 2.1.2 6-Tier Pricing
      * 2.1.3 Interchange Plus Pricing
      * 2.1.4 Bill Backs
    * 2.2 Other Fees
      * 2.2.1 Authorization fee
      * 2.2.2 Statement fee
      * 2.2.3 Monthly minimum fee
      * 2.2.4 Batch fee
      * 2.2.5 Customer Service fee
      * 2.2.6 Annual fee
      * 2.2.7 Early Termination fee
      * 2.2.8 Chargeback fee
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Methods of processing credit cards

Today a majority of credit card transactions are sent electronically to
merchant processing banks for authorization, capture and deposit. Various
methods exist for presenting a credit card sale to "the system." In all
circumstances either the entire magnetic strip is read by a swipe through a
credit card terminal/reader or the credit card information is manually entered
into a credit card terminal, a computer or website. The earliest methods,
submitting credit card slips to a merchant processing bank by US mail, or by
accessing an Automated Response Unit (ARU) by telephone, are still in use
today but have long been overshadowed by electronic devices. These early
methods used two-part forms and a manual device for mechanically imprinting
the embossed card number information onto the forms. Whenever practical it is
best to swipe a credit card because the rates will be much lower and the
incidence of stolen credit card number fraud is greatly reduced.

### [edit] Credit card terminal

A typical credit card terminal that is still popular today.

A credit card terminal is a stand-alone piece of electronic equipment that
allows a merchant to swipe or key-enter a credit card's information as well as
additional information required to process a credit card transaction. A credit
card terminal is a dedicated piece of equipment that only processes credit
cards although it is common for related transactions including gift cards and
check verification to also be performed. A credit card terminal typically must
be plugged in to a power supply and connected to a telephone line. However,
some terminals may be powered by batteries, communicate over the Internet or
through the cellular phone networks. When a credit card is processed (either
swiped through the magnetic stripe reader or keyed in to the keypad), it
contacts the network to verify if the credit card can be authorized. The
transaction is then stored on the machine until the polling window is opened.
The machine will either upload the electronic funds directly to the merchant
bank, or a polling service provider will dial in to collect, process then
submit the data to the merchant bank. The most popular credit card terminals
consist of a modem, keypad, printer, magnetic stripe reader, power supply and
memory card. They have had the same basic design since the 1980s. As with
computers, there is a wide range of memory capacities and other features like
built-in printers and debit card pinpads that affect the manufacturing cost of
a credit card terminal.

### [edit] Automated Response Unit (ARU)

An ARU (also known as a voice authorization, capture and deposit) allows the
manual keyed entry and subsequent authorization of a credit card over a
cellular or land-line telephone. With this method a merchant typically
imprints their customer's card with an imprinter to create a customer receipt
and merchant copy, then process the transaction instantaneously over the
phone.

### [edit] Payment gateway

A payment gateway is an e-commerce service that authorizes payments for
e-businesses and online retailers. It is the equivalent of a physical POS
(point-of-sale) terminal located in most retail outlets. A merchant account
provider is typically a separate company from the payment gateway. Some
merchant account providers have their own payment gateways but the majority of
companies use 3rd party payment gateways. The gateway usually has 2
components: a) the virtual terminal that can allow for a merchant to securely
login and key in credit card numbers or b) have the website's shopping-cart
connect to the gateway via an API to allow for real time processing from the
merchant's website.

### [edit] Level 2 or Level 3 Processing - Purchasing Cards

Visa and Mastercard have created a specialized type of credit card used
primarily by government agencies and businesses. Increasingly, corporations
and government agencies are relying on this form of payment to compensate
their service providers and suppliers. Businesses benefit by receiving their
funds quickly and by winning competitive bids and government contracts where
purchasing cards are the required form of payment. The downside, however, is
the increased costs associated with receiving these payments. These costs will
usually be much higher than accepting a standard consumer credit card.

The solution is that some businesses may qualify for ways to process these
transactions that allow them to pay lower fees if they can supply additional
information, called "level 2 or level 3 data". For example, if government
transactions are over $5,000, businesses can significantly reduce their
transaction costs by including "level 2 or level 3 data" about the purchase
along with each transaction. Examples of level 2 or level 3 data is a purchase
order number associated with the transaction that the credit card will be
paying. This data is passed on to the purchaser so that it may be many times
easier to reconcile the transaction. If all the required data is not collected
and passed on during the transaction, the merchant can have surcharges added
to the basic fees or be forced into a non qualified transaction category.

### [edit] Merchant Account Marketing

Merchant accounts are marketed to merchants by two basic methods: either
directly by the processor or sponsoring bank, or by an authorized agent for
the bank and additionally directly registered with both Visa and MasterCard as
an ISO/MSP (Independent Selling Organization / Member Service Provider).
Marketing details are by card issuers like Visa and MasterCard, and are
enforced by various rules and fines.

### [edit] Marketing by Banks

A bank that has a merchant processing relationship with Visa and Mastercard,
also known as a member bank, can issue merchant accounts directly to
merchants. To reduce risk, some banks limit approval to merchants in its
geographical area, those with a physical retail storefront, or those that have
been in business for 2 years or more.

### [edit] Marketing by Independent Sales Organization (ISO)/MSPs

To market merchant accounts, an ISO/MSP must be sponsored by a member bank.
This sponsorship requires that the bank verify the financial stability and
suitability of the company that will be marketing on its behalf. The ISO/MSP
must also pay a fee to be registered with Visa and Mastercard and must comply
with regulations in how they may market merchant accounts and the use of
copyrights of Visa and Mastercard. One way to verify if an ISO/MSP is in
compliance is to check a website or any other marketing material for a
disclosure "company is a registered ISO/MSP of bank, town, state. FDIC
insured". This disclosure is required by both Visa and Mastercard and will
cause a fine of up to $25,000 if it is not clearly visible. In almost all
cases, if there is no disclosure, the company is likely to be an uninformed
4th party or worse. In many cases unregistered operators have been responsible
for some of the worst horror stories from merchants.

## [edit] Rates and fees

A Merchant Account has a variety of fees, some periodic, others charged on a
per-item or percentage basis. Some fees are set by the merchant account
provider, but the majority of the per-item and percentage fees are passed
through the merchant account provider to the credit card issuing bank
according to a schedule of rates called interchange fees, which are set by
Visa and Mastercard. Interchange fees vary depending on card type and the
circumstances of the transaction. For example, if a transaction is made by
swiping a card through a credit card terminal it will be in a different
category than if it were keyed in manually.

### [edit] Discount Rates

The discount rate comprises a number of dues, fees, assessments, network
charges and mark-ups merchants are required to pay for accepting credit and
debit cards, the largest of which by far is the Interchange fee. Each bank or
ISO/MLS has real costs in addition to the wholesale interchange fees, and
creates profit by adding a mark-up to all the fees mentioned above. There are
a number of price models banks and ISOs/MLSs use to bill merchants for the
services rendered. Here are the more popular price models:

#### [edit] 3-Tier Pricing

The 3-Tier Pricing is the most popular pricing method and the simplest system
for most merchants, although the new 6-Tier Pricing is gaining in popularity.
In 3-Tier Pricing, the merchant account provider groups the transactions into
3 groups (tiers) and assigns a rate to each tier based on a criterion
established for each tier.

##### [edit] Qualified rate

A qualified rate is the percentage rate a merchant will be charged whenever
they accept a regular consumer credit card and process it in a manner defined
as "standard" by their merchant account provider using an approved credit card
processing solution. This is usually the lowest rate a merchant will incur
when accepting a credit card. The qualified rate is also the rate commonly
quoted to a merchant when they inquire about pricing. The qualified rate is
created based on the way a merchant will be accepting a majority of their
credit cards. For example, for an internet merchant, the internet interchange
categories will be defined as Qualified, while for a physical retailer only
transactions swiped through or read by their terminal in an ordinary manner
will be defined as Qualified.

##### [edit] Mid-qualified rate

Also known as a partially qualified rate, the mid-qualified rate is the
percentage rate a merchant will be charged whenever they accept a credit card
that does not qualify for the lowest rate (the qualified rate). This may
happen for several reasons such as:

  * A consumer credit card is keyed into a credit card terminal instead of being swiped
  * A special kind of credit card is used like a rewards card or business card

A mid-qualified rate is higher than a qualified rate. Some of the transactions
that are usually grouped into the Mid-Qualified Tier can cost the provider
more in interchange costs, so the merchant account providers do make a markup
on these rates.

The use of "rewards cards" can be as high as 40% of transactions. So it is
important that the financial impact of this fee be understood.

##### [edit] Non-qualified rate

The non-qualified rate is usually the highest percentage rate a merchant will
be charged whenever they accept a credit card. In most cases all transactions
that are not qualified or mid-qualified will fall to this rate. This may
happen for several reasons such as:

  * A consumer credit card is keyed into a credit card terminal instead of being swiped and address verification is not performed
  * A special kind of credit card is used like a business card and all required fields are not entered
  * A merchant does not settle their daily batch within the allotted time frame, usually past 48 hours from time of authorization.

A non-qualified rate can be significantly higher than a qualified rate and can
cost the provider much more in interchange costs, so the merchant account
providers do make a markup on these rates.

#### [edit] 6-Tier Pricing

As a result of the Wal-Mart Lawsuit and to compete against PIN-based debit
cards (which are processed outside of the Visa and Mastercard networks), Visa
and Mastercard lowered the interchange rates for debit cards well below those
for credit cards. Some providers can pass on the lower cost of these cards
directly to merchants. Consequently, the 3 tiers programs have added 2
classifications for debit cards that are processed without a PIN or with a PIN
for a total of 6 rate classifications.

#### [edit] Interchange Plus Pricing

Some providers offer merchant account services priced on an "interchange plus"
basis. These accounts are based on the "interchange" tables published by both
Visa Visa Interchange and MasterCard MasterCard Interchange. This type of
pricing creates a discount rate by adding interchange rates, fees,
assessments, markups and other costs.

#### [edit] Bill Backs

A bill back is a relatively new price model and a variation on interchange
plus pricing. It has some variations but the basic concept is that the
merchant pays interchange on the statement that the transactions took place
and then pay all other fees, like dues, fees and assessments, etc on the next
month's statement. It requires a great deal of time to research the actual
cost per transaction with the bill back system. Some merchants feel this form
of pricing is very misleading.

### [edit] Other Fees

#### [edit] Authorization fee

The Authorization fee (actually an authorization request fee) is charged each
time a transaction is sent to the card-issuing bank to be authorized. The fee
applies whether or not the request is approved. Note this is not the same as
Transaction fee or Per Item fee.

#### [edit] Statement fee

The statement fee is a monthly fee associated with the monthly statement that
is sent to the merchant at the end of each monthly processing cycle. This
statement shows how much processing was done by the merchant during the month
and what fees were incurred as a result.

#### [edit] Monthly minimum fee

The monthly minimum fee is a way to ensure that merchants pay a minimum amount
in fees each month to cover costs from the provider to maintain the account
and to create minimal profits. If a merchant's qualified fees do not equal or
exceed the monthly minimum they will be charged up to the monthly minimum to
satisfy their minimum fee requirements.

Example: A merchant has signed a contract with a $25.00 monthly minimum fee.
If all the fees for the most recent month of processing total only $15.00,
this merchant will be charged an additional $10.00 to meet their monthly
minimum requirements. Sometimes there are fees that are charged that are not a
part of the monthly minimum, such as statement fees. It is industry standard
to charge a monthly minimum.

#### [edit] Batch fee

A batch fee (also known as a batch header fee) can be charged to a merchant
whenever the merchant "settles" their terminal. Settling a terminal, also
known as "batching", is when a merchant sends their completed transactions for
the day to their acquiring bank for payment. Some providers perform this
automatically. It is important to close a batch every 24 hours or a higher
rate will be assessed by Visa or Mastercard.

#### [edit] Customer Service fee

The customer service fee (also known as a maintenance fee) can be charged by
some providers to pay for the cost of customer service.

#### [edit] Annual fee

The Annual fee can be charged by some providers to pay for costs of
maintaining the merchant's account. Sometimes these fees can be quarterly. The
fee can be from $49-$399.

#### [edit] Early Termination fee

The early termination fee can be charged by some providers if the merchant
ends the contract before the end of the contract term. While contract terms of
1-3 years are typical, some providers have terms of up to 5 years with a one
year prior notice to cancel or the fee will be assessed. Some providers also
assess all statement fees and monthly minimums remaining when the contract is
terminated. Some providers may also assess a "lost profit" fee based on an
assumption of profits they concluded they would have earned during the full
term of the contract.

#### [edit] Chargeback fee

The chargeback is the largest risk that is presented to banks and providers
and therefore their biggest fear. This is not to be confused with a refund,
which is simply a merchant refunding a transaction. In the Visa and Mastercard
rules, the merchant's processing bank is 100% responsible for all the
transactions that the merchant performs. This can leave the provider open to
millions of dollars of potential losses if the merchant operates in an illegal
or risky manner and generates many chargebacks. The providers pass this cost
on to the merchant, but if the merchant is fraudulent or simply does not have
the money, the provider must pay all the costs to make the card holder whole.
The chargeback risk is the largest part taken into consideration during the
contract application and underwriting process. Some banks are many times more
stringent than others when assessing a merchant's chargeback risk.

If a merchant encounters a chargeback they may be assessed a fee by their
acquiring bank. A potential chargeback is presented on behalf of the card
holder's bank to the merchant's credit card processing bank. A reason code is
established by the card issuer to properly identify the type of potential
chargeback based on the card holder's complaint. The most common complaint is
that the card holder can not remember the transaction. Usually, these
potential chargebacks are corrected when the merchant's processing bank sends
over more details about the transaction. Some providers charge a fee for this
service, known as a "Retrieval Request". A chargeback can also be related to a
fraud or similar dispute that the card holder is claiming to the merchant.
This fee can be charged by some providers whether the chargeback is successful
or not and is not dependent on the amount of the chargeback.

Currently both Visa and Mastercard require all merchants to maintain no more
than 1% of dollar volume processed to be chargebacks. If the percentage goes
above, there are fines starting at $5000 - $25,000 to the merchant's
processing bank and ultimately passed on to the merchant.

In all cases, a chargeback will cost the merchant the chargeback fee,
typically $15-$30, plus the cost of the transaction and the amount processed.

  

## [edit] See also

  * Merchant services
  * Credit card
  * Credit card terminal
  * Payment gateway
  * Electronic Commerce
  * Credit card fraud
  * Chargeback insurance
  * Payment card industry (PCI)
  * Cardholder Information Security Program (CISP)

## [edit] References

  * Visa Interchange Visa Interchange rate table.
  * Mastercard Interchange Mastercard Interchange rate table.
  * MasterCard Merchant Rules PDF guidelines for all businesses that accept MasterCard credit cards.
  * Visa USA - Accepting Visa Guide and information for accepting Visa and other credit cards.

## [edit] External links

  * Electronic Transaction Association (ETA) is the international trade association for the payment processing industry.
  * The GreenSheet is a trade newsletter for the merchant account sales industry, serving Banks, ISOs and MLSs.
  * National Association of Payment Professionals is an organization created to provide education, benefits, liaison/representation and certification to individuals selling in the payment processing industry.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merchant_account"

Categories: Finance | Payment systems | Merchant services

Hidden categories: Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008 | All
articles with unsourced statements

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 29 April 2009, at 20:34 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



