
# Adverse selection

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Adverse selection, anti-selection, or negative selection is a term used in
economics, insurance, statistics, and risk management. It refers to a market
process in which "bad" results occur when buyers and sellers have asymmetric
information (i.e. access to different information): the "bad" products or
customers are more likely to be selected. A bank that sets one price for all
its checking account customers runs the risk of being adversely selected
against by its low-balance, high-activity (and hence least profitable)
customers. Two ways to model adverse selection are with signaling games and
screening games.

## Contents

  * 1 Example: Insurance
  * 2 See also
  * 3 References
  * 4 External links

  
## [edit] Example: Insurance

The term adverse selection was originally used in insurance. It describes a
situation where an individual's demand for insurance (either the propensity to
buy insurance, or the quantity purchased, or both) is positively correlated
with the individual's risk of loss (e.g. higher risks buy more insurance), and
the insurer is unable to allow for this correlation in the price of
insurance[1]. This may be because of private information known only to the
individual (information asymmetry), or because of regulations or social norms
which prevent the insurer from using certain categories of known information
to set prices (e.g. the insurer may be prohibited from using information such
as gender or ethnic origin or genetic test results). The latter scenario is
sometimes referred to as 'regulatory adverse selection'[2].

The potentially 'adverse' nature of this phenomenon can be illustrated by the
link between smoking status and mortality. Non-smokers, on average, are more
likely to live longer, while smokers, on average, are more likely to die
younger. If insurers do not vary prices for life insurance according to
smoking status, life insurance will be a better buy for smokers than for non-
smokers. So smokers may be more likely to buy insurance, or may tend to buy
larger amounts, than non-smokers. The average mortality of the combined
policyholder group will be higher than the average mortality of the general
population. From the insurer's viewpoint, the higher mortality of the group
which 'selects' to buy insurance is 'adverse'. The insurer raises the price of
insurance accordingly. As a consequence, non-smokers may be less likely to buy
insurance (or may buy smaller amounts) than if they could buy at a lower price
to reflect their lower risk. The reduction in insurance purchase by non-
smokers is also 'adverse' from the insurer's viewpoint, and perhaps also from
a public policy viewpoint.

Furthermore, if there is a range of increasing risk categories in the
population, the increase in the insurance price due to adverse selection may
lead the lowest remaining risks to cancel or not renew their insurance. This
leads to a further increase in price, and hence the lowest remaining risks
cancel their insurance, leading to a further increase in price, and so on.
Eventually this 'adverse selection spiral' might in theory lead to the
collapse of the insurance market.

To counter the effects of adverse selection, insurers (to the extent that laws
permit) ask a range of questions and may request medical or other reports on
individuals who apply to buy insurance, so that the price quoted can be varied
accordingly, and any unreasonably high or unpredictable risks rejected. This
risk selection process is known as underwriting. In many countries, insurance
law incorporates an 'utmost good faith' or uberrima fides doctrine which
requires potential customers to answer any underwriting questions asked by the
insurer fully and honestly; if they fail to do this, the insurer may later
refuse to pay claims.

Whilst adverse selection in theory seems an obvious and inevitable consequence
of economic incentives, empirical evidence is mixed. Several studies
investigating correlations between risk and insurance purchase have failed to
show the predicted positive correlation for life insurance[3], auto
insurance[4][5], and health insurance[6]. On the other hand, "positive" test
results for adverse selection have been reported in long-term care
insurance[7] and annuity markets[8]. These "positive" results tend to be based
on demonstrating more subtle relationships between risk and purchasing
behavior (e.g. between mortality and whether the the customer chooses a life
annuity which is fixed or inflation-linked), rather than simple correlations
of risk and quantity purchased.

One reason why adverse selection may be muted in practice may be that
insurers' underwriting is largely effective. Another possible reason is
negative correlation between risk aversion and risk level in the population:
if risk aversion is higher amongst lower risk customers, adverse selection can
be reduced or even reversed, leading to 'propitious' or 'advantageous'
selection[9][10]. For example, there is evidence that smokers are more willing
to do risky jobs than non-smokers[11], and this greater willingess to accept
risk might reduce insurance purchase by smokers. From a public policy
viewpoint, some adverse selection can also be advantageous because it may lead
to a higher fraction of total losses for the whole population being covered by
insurance than if there was no adverse selection[12].

  

## [edit] See also

  * Asymmetric information
  * Community rating
  * Moral hazard
  * Agency cost
  * Principal-agent problem
  * Contract theory

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Adverse Selection by Seth J. Chandler, The Wolfram Demonstrations Project
  2. ^ Polborn, M.K., Hoy, M. & Sadanand, A: "Advantageous Effects of Regulatory Adverse Selection in the Life Insurance Market", Economic Journal, 116, 508: 327-354.
  3. ^ Cawley, J. & Philipson, T: "An Empirical Examination of Barriers to Trade in Insurance", American Economic Review, 89:827-846.
  4. ^ Chiappori, P.A. & Salanie, B: "Testing for Asymmetric Information in Insurance Markets", Journal of Political Economy, 108:56-78.
  5. ^ Dionne, G. GouriÃ©roux, C. & Vanasse, C:, "Testing for Evidence of Adverse Selection in the Automobile Insurance Market: A Comment" Journal of Political Economy, 109: 444-453.
  6. ^ Cardon, J.H. & Hendel, I: "Asymmetric information in health insurance: evidence from the National Medical Expenditure Survey", Rand Journal of Economics, 32:408-427.
  7. ^ Finkelstein, A. & McGarry, K: "Multiple dimensions of private information: evidence from the long-term care insurance market", American Economic Review, 96: 938-958..
  8. ^ Finkelstein, A. & Poterba, J: "Adverse selection in insurance markets: policyholder evidence from the UK annuity market", Journal of Political Economy, 112: 183-208.
  9. ^ Hemenway, D: "Propitious selection", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105: 1063-1069.
  10. ^ De Meza, D. & Webb, D.C: "Advantageous selection in insurance markets", RAND Journal of Economics, 32: 249-262.
  11. ^ Viscusi, W.K. & Hersch, J: "Cigarette smokers as job risk takers", Review of Economics and Statistics, 83: 269-280.
  12. ^ Thomas, R.G: "Loss coverage as a public policy objective for risk classification schemes", Journal of Risk & Insurance, 75: 997-1018.

  * Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The market for" lemons": Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), 488-500.

## [edit] External links

  * William E Bluhm, "Cumulative Anti-Selection Theory," Society of Actuaries 50th Anniversary Monograph, Chapter 5, 1999.

  * The Economist: Research Tools, Adverse Selection [1]

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adverse_selection"

Categories: Market failure | Asymmetric information | Insurance terms

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 28 February 2009, at 15:31.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



