
# Carbon credit

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

It has been suggested that Carbon offset be merged into this article or
section. (Discuss)  
<IMG> Energy portal  
    This article deals with carbon credits for international trading. For carbon credits for individuals, see Personal carbon trading. For voluntary schemes see also Carbon offset
Carbon credits are a key component of national and international attempts to
mitigate the growth in concentrations of greenhouse gases (GHGs). Carbon
trading is an application of an emissions trading approach. Greenhouse gas
emissions are capped and then markets are used to allocate the emissions among
the group of regulated sources. The idea is to allow market mechanisms to
drive industrial and commercial processes in the direction of low emissions or
less "carbon intensive" approaches than are used when there is no cost to
emitting carbon dioxide and other GHGs into the atmosphere. Since GHG
mitigation projects generate credits, this approach can be used to finance
carbon reduction schemes between trading partners and around the world.

There are also many companies that sell carbon credits to commercial and
individual customers who are interested in lowering their carbon footprint on
a voluntary basis. These carbon offsetters purchase the credits from an
investment fund or a carbon development company that has aggregated the
credits from individual projects. The quality of the credits is based in part
on the validation process and sophistication of the fund or development
company that acted as the sponsor to the carbon project. This is reflected in
their price; voluntary units typically have less value than the units sold
through the rigorously-validated Clean Development Mechanism[1].

## Contents

  * 1 Background
    * 1.1 Emission allowances
    * 1.2 Kyoto's 'Flexible mechanisms'
    * 1.3 Emission markets
    * 1.4 Setting a market price for carbon
  * 2 How buying carbon credits can reduce emissions
    * 2.1 Credits versus taxes
  * 3 Creating Real Carbon Credits
    * 3.1 Additionality and Its Importance
    * 3.2 Criticisms
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Background

Burning of fossil fuels is a major source of industrial greenhouse gas
emissions, especially for power, cement, steel, textile, fertilizer and many
other industries which rely on fossil fuels (coal, electricity derived from
coal, natural gas and oil). The major greenhouse gases emitted by these
industries are carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs), etc, all of which increase the atmosphere's ability to trap infrared
energy and thus affect the climate.

The concept of carbon credits came into existence as a result of increasing
awareness of the need for controlling emissions. The IPCC has observed[2]
that:

> Policies that provide a real or implicit price of carbon could create
incentives for producers and consumers to significantly invest in low-GHG
products, technologies and processes. Such policies could include economic
instruments, government funding and regulation,

while noting that a tradable permit system is one of the policy instruments
that has been shown to be environmentally effective in the industrial sector,
as long as there are reasonable levels of predictability over the initial
allocation mechanism and long-term price.

The mechanism was formalized in the Kyoto Protocol, an international agreement
between more than 170 countries, and the market mechanisms were agreed through
the subsequent Marrakesh Accords. The mechanism adopted was similar to the
successful US Acid Rain Program to reduce some industrial pollutants.

### [edit] Emission allowances

The Protocol agreed 'caps' or quotas on the maximum amount of Greenhouse gases
for developed and developing countries, listed in its Annex I [3]. In turn
these countries set quotas on the emissions of installations run by local
business and other organizations, generically termed 'operators'. Countries
manage this through their own national 'registries', which are required to be
validated and monitored for compliance by the UNFCCC[4]. Each operator has an
allowance of credits, where each unit gives the owner the right to emit one
metric tonne of carbon dioxide or other equivalent greenhouse gas. Operators
that have not used up their quotas can sell their unused allowances as carbon
credits, while businesses that are about to exceed their quotas can buy the
extra allowances as credits, privately or on the open market. As demand for
energy grows over time, the total emissions must still stay within the cap,
but it allows industry some flexibility and predictability in its planning to
accommodate this.

By permitting allowances to be bought and sold, an operator can seek out the
most cost-effective way of reducing its emissions, either by investing in
'cleaner' machinery and practices or by purchasing emissions from another
operator who already has excess 'capacity'.

Since 2005, the Kyoto mechanism has been adopted for CO2 trading by all the
countries within the European Union under its European Trading Scheme (EU ETS)
with the European Commission as its validating authority[5]. From 2008, EU
participants must link with the other developed countries who ratified Annex I
of the protocol, and trade the six most significant anthropogenic greenhouse
gases. In the United States, which has not ratified Kyoto, and Australia,
whose ratification came into force in March 2008, similar schemes are being
considered.

### [edit] Kyoto's 'Flexible mechanisms'

A credit can be an emissions allowance which was originally allocated or
auctioned by the national administrators of a cap-and-trade program, or it can
be an offset of emissions. Such offsetting and mitigating activities can occur
in any developing country which has ratified the Kyoto Protocol, and has a
national agreement in place to validate its carbon project through one of the
UNFCCC's approved mechanisms. Once approved, these units are termed Certified
Emission Reductions, or CERs. The Protocol allows these projects to be
constructed and credited in advance of the Kyoto trading period.

The Kyoto Protocol provides for three mechanisms that enable countries or
operators in developed countries to acquire greenhouse gas reduction
credits[6]

  * Under Joint Implementation (JI) a developed country with relatively high costs of domestic greenhouse reduction would set up a project in another developed country.
  * Under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) a developed country can 'sponsor' a greenhouse gas reduction project in a developing country where the cost of greenhouse gas reduction project activities is usually much lower, but the atmospheric effect is globally equivalent. The developed country would be given credits for meeting its emission reduction targets, while the developing country would receive the capital investment and clean technology or beneficial change in land use.
  * Under International Emissions Trading (IET) countries can trade in the international carbon credit market to cover their shortfall in allowances. Countries with surplus credits can sell them to countries with capped emission commitments under the Kyoto Protocol.

These carbon projects can be created by a national government or by an
operator within the country. In reality, most of the transactions are not
performed by national governments directly, but by operators who have been set
quotas by their country.

### [edit] Emission markets

For trading purposes, one allowance or CER is considered equivalent to one
metric tonne of CO2 emissions. These allowances can be sold privately or in
the international market at the prevailing market price. These trade and
settle internationally and hence allow allowances to be transferred between
countries. Each international transfer is validated by the UNFCCC. Each
transfer of ownership within the European Union is additionally validated by
the European Commission.

Climate exchanges have been established to provide a spot market in
allowances, as well as futures and options market to help discover a market
price and maintain liquidity. Carbon prices are normally quoted in Euros per
tonne of carbon dioxide or its equivalent (CO2e). Other greenhouse gasses can
also be traded, but are quoted as standard multiples of carbon dioxide with
respect to their global warming potential. These features reduce the quota's
financial impact on business, while ensuring that the quotas are met at a
national and international level.

Currently there are five exchanges trading in carbon allowances: the Chicago
Climate Exchange, European Climate Exchange, Nord Pool, PowerNext and the
European Energy Exchange. Recently, NordPool listed a contract to trade
offsets generated by a CDM carbon project called Certified Emission Reductions
(CERs). Many companies now engage in emissions abatement, offsetting, and
sequestration programs to generate credits that can be sold on one of the
exchanges. At least two private electronic markets have been established in
2008: CantorCO2e[7] and Preserval Marketplace[8].

Managing emissions is one of the fastest-growing segments in financial
services in the City of London with a market now worth about â¬30 billion,
but which could grow to â¬1 trillion within a decade.[citation needed] Louis
Redshaw, head of environmental markets at Barclays Capital predicts that
"Carbon will be the world's biggest commodity market, and it could become the
world's biggest market overall." [9]

### [edit] Setting a market price for carbon

<IMG>

This section includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (August 2008)  
Unchecked, energy use and hence emission levels are predicted to keep rising
over time. Thus the number of companies needing to buy credits will increase,
and the rules of supply and demand will push up the market price, encouraging
more groups to undertake environmentally friendly activities that create
carbon credits to sell.

An individual allowance, such as a Kyoto Assigned Amount Unit (AAU) or its
near-equivalent European Union Allowance (EUA), may have a different market
value to an offset such as a CER. This is due to the lack of a developed
secondary market for CERs, a lack of homegeneity between projects which causes
difficulty in pricing, as well as questions due to the principle of
supplementarity and its lifetime. Additionally, offsets generated by a carbon
project under the Clean Development Mechanism are potentially limited in value
because operators in the EU ETS are restricted as to what percentage of their
allowance can be met through these flexible mechanisms.

Yale University economics professor William Nordhaus argues that the price of
carbon needs to be high enough to motivate the changes in behavior and changes
in economic production systems necessary to effectively limit emissions of
greenhouse gases.

> Raising the price of carbon will achieve four goals. First, it will provide
signals to consumers about what goods and services are high-carbon ones and
should therefore be used more sparingly. Second, it will provide signals to
producers about which inputs use more carbon (such as coal and oil) and which
use less or none (such as natural gas or nuclear power), thereby inducing
firms to substitute low-carbon inputs. Third, it will give market incentives
for inventors and innovators to develop and introduce low-carbon products and
processes that can replace the current generation of technologies. Fourth, and
most important, a high carbon price will economize on the information that is
required to do all three of these tasks. Through the market mechanism, a high
carbon price will raise the price of products according to their carbon
content. Ethical consumers today, hoping to minimize their âcarbon
footprint,â have little chance of making an accurate calculation of the
relative carbon use in, say, driving 250 miles as compared with flying 250
miles. A harmonized carbon tax would raise the price of a good proportionately
to exactly the amount of CO2 that is emitted in all the stages of production
that are involved in producing that good. If 0.01 of a ton of carbon emissions
results from the wheat growing and the milling and the trucking and the baking
of a loaf of bread, then a tax of $30 per ton carbon will raise the price of
bread by $0.30. The âcarbon footprintâ is automatically calculated by the
price system. Consumers would still not know how much of the price is due to
carbon emissions, but they could make their decisions confident that they are
paying for the social cost of their carbon footprint.

Nordhaus has suggested, based on the social cost of carbon emissions, that an
optimal price of carbon is around $30(US) per ton and will need to increase
with inflation.

> The social cost of carbon is the additional damage caused by an additional
ton of carbon emissions. ... The optimal carbon price, or optimal carbon tax,
is the market price (or carbon tax) on carbon emissions that balances the
incremental costs of reducing carbon emissions with the incremental benefits
of reducing climate damages. ... [I]f a country wished to impose a carbon tax
of $30 per ton of carbon, this would involve a tax on gasoline of about 9
cents per gallon. Similarly, the tax on coal-generated electricity would be
about 1 cent per kWh, or 10 percent of the current retail price. At current
levels of carbon emissions in the United States, a tax of $30 per ton of
carbon would generate $50 billion of revenue per year.

William Nordhaus, 2008. A Question of Balance - Weighing the Options on Global
Warming Policies, Yale University Press.

## [edit] How buying carbon credits can reduce emissions

<IMG>

This section includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (August 2008)  
See also: Economics of global warming

Carbon credits create a market for reducing greenhouse emissions by giving a
monetary value to the cost of polluting the air. Emissions become an internal
cost of doing business and are visible on the balance sheet alongside raw
materials and other liabilities or assets.

By way of example, consider a business that owns a factory putting out 100,000
tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions in a year. Its government is an Annex I
country that enacts a law to limit the emissions that the business can
produce. So the factory is given a quota of say 80,000 tonnes per year. The
factory either reduces its emissions to 80,000 tonnes or is required to
purchase carbon credits to offset the excess. After costing up alternatives
the business may decide that it is uneconomical or infeasible to invest in new
machinery for that year. Instead it may choose to buy carbon credits on the
open market from organizations that have been approved as being able to sell
legitimate carbon credits.

  * One seller might be a company that will offer to offset emissions through a project in the developing world, such as recovering methane from a swine farm to feed a power station that previously would use fossil fuel. So although the factory continues to emit gases, it would pay another group to reduce the equivalent of 20,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions from the atmosphere for that year.
  * Another seller may have already invested in new low-emission machinery and have a surplus of allowances as a result. The factory could make up for its emissions by buying 20,000 tonnes of allowances from them. The cost of the seller's new machinery would be subsidized by the sale of allowances. Both the buyer and the seller would submit accounts for their emissions to prove that their allowances were met correctly.

### [edit] Credits versus taxes

Credits were chosen by the signatories to the Kyoto Protocol as an alternative
to Carbon taxes. A criticism of tax-raising schemes is that they are
frequently not hypothecated, and so some or all of the taxation raised by a
government may be applied inefficiently or not used to benefit the
environment.

By treating emissions as a market commodity it becomes easier for business to
understand and manage their activities, while economists and traders can
attempt to predict future pricing using well understood market theories. Thus
the main advantages of a tradable carbon credit over a carbon tax are:

  * the price is more likely to be perceived as fair by those paying it, as the cost of carbon is set by the market, and not by politicians. Investors in credits have more control over their own costs.
  * the flexible mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol ensure that all investment goes into genuine sustainable carbon reduction schemes, through its internationally-agreed validation process.

## [edit] Creating Real Carbon Credits

The principle of Supplementarity within the Kyoto Protocol means that internal
abatement of emissions should take precedence before a country buys in carbon
credits. However it also established the Clean Development Mechanism as a
Flexible Mechanism by which capped entities could develop real, measurable,
permanent emissions reductions voluntarily in sectors outside the cap. Many
criticisms of carbon credits stem from the fact that establishing that an
emission of CO2-equivalent greenhouse gas has truly been reduced involves a
complex process. This process has evolved as the concept of a carbon project
has been refined over the past 10 years.

The first step in determining whether or not a carbon project has legitimately
led to the reduction of real, measurable, permanent emissions is understanding
the CDM methodology process. This is the process by which project sponsors
submit, through a Designated Operational Entity (DOE), their concepts for
emissions reduction creation. The CDM Executive Board, with the CDM
Methodology Panel and their expert advisors, review each project and decide
how and if they do indeed result in reductions that are additional[10]

### [edit] Additionality and Its Importance

<IMG>

This section includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (August 2008)  
It is also important for any carbon credit (offset) to prove a concept called
additionality. Additionality is a term used by Kyoto's Clean Development
Mechanism to describe the fact that a carbon dioxide reduction project (carbon
project) would not have occurred had it not been for concern for the
mitigation of climate change. More succinctly, a project that has proven
additionality is a beyond-business-as-usual project.

It is generally agreed that voluntary carbon offset projects must also prove
additionality in order to ensure the legitimacy of the environmental
stewardship claims resulting from the retirement of the carbon credit
(offset). According the World Resources Institute/World Business Council for
Sustainable Development (WRI/WBCSD) : "GHG emission trading programs operate
by capping the emissions of a fixed number of individual facilities or
sources. Under these programs, tradable 'offset credits' are issued for
project-based GHG reductions that occur at sources not covered by the program.
Each offset credit allows facilities whose emissions are capped to emit more,
in direct proportion to the GHG reductions represented by the credit. The idea
is to achieve a zero net increase in GHG emissions, because each tonne of
increased emissions is 'offset' by project-based GHG reductions. The
difficulty is that many projects that reduce GHG emissions (relative to
historical levels) would happen regardless of the existence of a GHG program
and without any concern for climate change mitigation. If a project 'would
have happened anyway,' then issuing offset credits for its GHG reductions will
actually allow a positive net increase in GHG emissions, undermining the
emissions target of the GHG program. Additionality is thus critical to the
success and integrity of GHG programs that recognize project-based GHG
reductions."

### [edit] Criticisms

Environmental restrictions and activities have been imposed on businesses
through regulation. Many are uneasy at this approach at managing emissions.

The Kyoto mechanism is the only internationally-agreed mechanism for
regulating carbon credit activities, and, crucially, includes checks for
additionality and overall effectiveness. Its supporting organisation, the
UNFCCC, is the only organisation with a global mandate on the overall
effectiveness of emission control systems, although enforcement of decisions
relies on national co-operation. The Kyoto trading period only applies for
five years between 2008 and 2012. The first phase of the EU ETS system started
before then, and is expected to continue in a third phase afterwards, and may
co-ordinate with whatever is internationally-agreed at but there is general
uncertainty as to what will be agreed in Post-Kyoto Protocol negotiations on
greenhouse gas emissions. As business investment often operates over decades,
this adds risk and uncertainty to their plans. As several countries
responsible for a large proportion of global emissions (notably USA,
Australia, China) have avoided mandatory caps, this also means that businesses
in capped countries may perceive themselves to be working at a competitive
disadvantage against those in uncapped countries as they are now paying for
their carbon costs directly.

A key concept behind the cap and trade system is that national quotas should
be chosen to represent genuine and meaningful reductions in national output of
emissions. Not only does this ensure that overall emissions are reduced but
also that the costs of emissions trading are carried fairly across all parties
to the trading system. However, governments of capped countries may seek to
unilaterally weaken their commitments, as evidenced by the 2006 and 2007
National Allocation Plans for several countries in the EU ETS, which were
submitted late and then were initially rejected by the European Commission for
being too lax [11].

A question has been raised over the grandfathering of allowances. Countries
within the EU ETS have granted their incumbent businesses most or all of their
allowances for free. This can sometimes be perceived as a protectionist
obstacle to new entrants into their markets. There have also been accusations
of power generators getting a 'windfall' profit by passing on these emissions
'charges' to their customers[12]. As the EU ETS moves into its second phase
and joins up with Kyoto, it seems likely that these problems will be reduced
as more allowances will be auctioned.

Establishing a meaningful offset project is complex: voluntary offsetting
activities outside the CDM mechanism are effectively unregulated and there
have been criticisms of offsetting in these unregulated activities. This
particularly applies to some voluntary corporate schemes in uncapped countries
and for some personal carbon offsetting schemes.

There have also been concerns raised over the validation of CDM credits. One
concern has related to the accurate assessment of additionality. Others relate
to the effort and time taken to get a project approved. Questions may also be
raised about the validation of the effectiveness of some projects; it appears
that many projects do not achieve the expected benefit after they have been
audited, and the CDM board can only approve a lower amount of CER credits. For
example, it may take longer to roll out a project than originally planned, or
an afforestation project may be reduced by disease or fire. For these reasons
some countries place additional restrictions on their local implementations
and will not allow credits for some types of carbon sink activity, such as
forestry or land use projects.

## [edit] See also

  * Carbon finance
  * Carbon leakage
  * Carbon project
  * Carbon Trade Watch
  * CDM Gold Standard
  * Emissions trading
  * Energy speculation
  * Kyoto Protocol emissions trading
  * Nutrient trading

## [edit] References

  1. ^ UNFCCC press briefing 20 November 2007
  2. ^ "Climate Change 2007: Mitigation of Climate Change, Summary for Policymakers from IPCC Fourth Assessment Report". Working Group III, IPCC. Item 25 and Table SPM.7, pages 29-31. http://www.mnp.nl/ipcc/docs/FAR/Approved%20SPM%20WGIII_0705rev5.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-05-10.
  3. ^ UNFCCC Countries' 1990 to 2012 emissions targets
  4. ^ UNFCCC Compliance under the Kyoto Protocol
  5. ^ EU climate change policies: Commission asks member states to fulfil their obligations
  6. ^ UNFCCC The Mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol
  7. ^ http://www.marketwatch.com/news/story/cantorco2e-launches-first-internet-cer/story.aspx?guid={D5A32490-A60B-49DF-94D0-F061CE2966F3}&dist=hppr
  8. ^ http://www.preserval.com
  9. ^ Herald Tribune Business: Carbon trading: Where greed is green
  10. ^ UNFCCC CDM project database
  11. ^ Reuters 13 Dec 2006: France and Italy seek to avoid EU carbon clash
  12. ^ Bloomberg July 17 2006: Europe fails Kyoto standards as trading scheme helps polluters

## [edit] External links

  * Differences between carbon credit and carbon offsets.
  * COMET-VR: a Decision Support System for agricultural producers, land managers, soil scientists and other agricultural interests to Measure and Model carbon based on land management choices.
  * 1605(b)a US Voluntary Reporting Registery.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Global warming and climate change  
Temperatures  
Instrumental record Â· Satellite record Â· Past 1,000 years Â· Since 1880 Â·
Geologic record Â· Historical climatology Â· Paleoclimatology  
Causes  
Anthropogenic

Aviation Â· Biofuel Â· Carbon dioxide Â· Fossil fuel Â· Global dimming Â·
Global warming potential Â· Greenhouse effect Â· Greenhouse gases Â· Land use
and forestry Â· Urban heat island  
Natural

Albedo Â· Bond events Â· Cloud forcing Â· Glaciation Â· Global cooling Â·
Ocean variability (AMO Â· ENSO Â· IOD Â· PDO) Â· Orbital variations Â· Orbital
forcing Â· Radiative forcing Â· Solar variation Â· Volcanism  
Opinion and  
controversy

Scientific opinion Â· Scientists opposing the mainstream assessment Â· Climate
change denial  
Models and politics  
Models

Global climate model  
Politics

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC / FCCC) Â·
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)  
Potential effects and issues  
General

Climate change and agriculture Â· Drought Â· Economics of global warming Â·
Glacier retreat Â· Mass extinction Â· Ozone depletion Â· Ocean acidification
Â· Sea level rise Â· Season creep Â· Shutdown of thermohaline circulation  
By country

Australia Â· India Â· United States  
Mitigation  
Kyoto Protocol

Clean Development Mechanism Â· Joint Implementation Â· Bali roadmap  
Governmental

European Climate Change Programme Â· United Kingdom Climate Change Programme
Â· Oil phase-out in Sweden Â· Coal phase out  
Schemes

Emissions trading Â· Personal carbon trading Â· Carbon tax Â· Carbon offset Â·
Carbon credit Â· Carbon dioxide sink (carbon sequestration) Â· Cap and Share  
Energy conservation

Efficient energy use Â· Renewable energy Â· Renewable energy commercialization
Â· Renewable energy development Â· Soft energy path  
Other

G8 Climate Change Roundtable Â· Individual and political action on climate
change Â· Climate change mitigation scenarios  
Proposed adaptations  
Strategies

Damming glacial lakes Â· Drought tolerance Â· Irrigation investment Â·
Rainwater storage Â· Sustainable development Â· Weather control  
Programmes

Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change Â· Land Allocation Decision Support System  
Category:Global warming Â· Category:Climate change Â· Glossary of climate
change  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carbon_credit"

Categories: Climate change policy | Carbon finance | Carbon Sequestration

Hidden categories: Articles to be merged since May 2008 | All articles to be
merged | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced
statements since March 2008 | Articles lacking in-text citations from August
2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * PortuguÃªs

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 19 April 2009, at 22:36 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



