
# Business activity monitoring

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Business Activity Monitoring (BAM) is software that aids in monitoring of
business activities, as those activities are implemented in computer systems.

## Contents

  * 1 Description
  * 2 Goals and Benefits
  * 3 Key Features
  * 4 Deployment Effort
  * 5 Processing Events
  * 6 Example 1
  * 7 Example 2
  * 8 External links
  * 9 Also See Related Fields

  
## [edit] Description

The term 'Business Activity Monitoring' was originally coined by analysts
Gartner, Inc and refers to the aggregation, analysis, and presentation of real
time information about activities inside organizations and involving customers
and partners. A Business Activity can either be a business process that is
orchestrated by Business Process Management (BPM) software, or a business
process that is a series of activities spanning multiple systems and
applications. BAM is an enterprise solution primarily intended to provide a
real-time summary of business activities to operations managers and upper
management.

## [edit] Goals and Benefits

The goals of Business Activity Monitoring are to provide real time information
about the status and results of various operations, processes, and
transactions. The main benefits of BAM are to enable an enterprise to make
better informed business decisions, quickly address problem areas, and re-
position organizations to take full advantage of emerging opportunities.

## [edit] Key Features

One of the most visible features of BAM solutions is the presentation of
information on dashboards that contain key performance indicators (KPIs) used
to provide assurance and visibility of activity and performance. This
information is used by Technical and Business Operations to provide
visibility, measurement, and assurance of key business activities. It is also
exploited by Event Correlation to detect and warn of impending problems.

Although BAM systems usually use a computer dashboard display to present data,
BAM is distinct from the dashboards used by Business Intelligence (BI) in so
far as events are processed in real-time and pushed to the dashboard in BAM
systems, whereas BI dashboards refresh at predetermined intervals by polling
or querying databases. Depending on the refresh interval selected, BAM and BI
dashboards can be similar or vary widely.

Some BAM solutions additionally provide trouble notification functions, which
allows them to interact automatically with the Trouble-Ticket System. For
example, whole groups of people can be sent e-mails, voice or text messages,
according to the nature of the problem. Automated problem solving, where
feasible, can correct and restart failed processes.

## [edit] Deployment Effort

In nearly all deployments of BAM solutions, extensive tailoring to specific
enterprises is required. Many BAM solutions seek to reduce extensive
customization and may offer templates that are written to solve common
problems in specific lines of business, for example Banking, Manufacturing,
and Stock Brokering. Due to the high degrees of System Integration required
for initial deployment, many enterprises use experts that specialize in BAM to
implement solutions.

## [edit] Processing Events

All BAM solutions process events. While most of the first BAM solutions were
closely linked to Business Process Management (BPM) solutions and therefore
processed events emitted as the process was being orchestrated, this had the
disadvantage of requiring enterprises to invest in BPM before being able to
acquire and use BAM. Fortunately the newer generation of BAM solutions are
based on Complex Event Processing (CEP) technology, and can process high
volumes of underlying technical events to derive higher level Business Events,
therefore severing the dependency on BPM, and providing the benefits of BAM to
a wider audience of customers.

## [edit] Example 1

A specific brief example follows of how a BAM solution might be used. A bank
is interested in minimizing the amount of money it borrows overnight from a
central bank. Interbank transfers must be communicated and arranged through
automation by a set time each business day. The failure of any vital
communication could cost the bank large sums in interest charged by the
central bank. A BAM solution would be programmed to become aware of each
message and await confirmation. Failure to receive confirmation within a
reasonable amount of time would be grounds for the BAM solution to raise an
alarm that would set in motion manual intervention to investigate the cause of
the delay and to push the problem toward resolution before it becomes costly.

## [edit] Example 2

Another example involves a mobile telecommunications company interested in
detecting a situation whereby new customers are not set up promptly and
correctly on their network and within the various CRM and Billing solutions.
Low level technical events such as messages passing from one application to
another over a middleware system, or transactions detected within a database
logfile, are processed by a CEP engine. All events relating to an individual
customer are correlated in order to detect an anomalous situation whereby an
individual customer has not been promptly or correctly provisioned, or set up.
An alert can be generated to notify technical operations or to notify business
operations, and the failed provisioning step may be restarted automatically.

## [edit] External links

  * Gartner overview of BAM, Definition (PDF)
  * BAM overview
  * David Luckham on BAM
  * SIMPROCESS

## [edit] Also See Related Fields

  * Business Service Management
  * Business Intelligence

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_activity_monitoring"

Categories: Business terms | Business software | Information systems |
Cognition | Events (computing)

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Polski
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 23 March 2009, at 03:50 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



