
# Stanley Kubrick

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Kubrick" redirects here. For the toy, see Kubrick (toy).

Stanley Kubrick  
<IMG>  
Self-portrait of Kubrick with a Leica III camera, when he worked for Look
(from the book Drama and Shadows).  
Born July 26, 1928(1928-07-26)  
New York City, New York, U.S.  
Died March 7, 1999 (aged 70)  
Harpenden, Hertfordshire, England  
Occupation Film Director, producer, screenwriter, cinematographer & editor  
Years active 1951â99  
Spouse(s) Toba Metz (1948â51) (divorced)  
Ruth Sobotka (1954â57) (divorced)  
Christiane Harlan (1958â99) (his death)  
Stanley Kubrick (July 26, 1928 â March 7, 1999) was an influential American-
British filmmaker, screenwriter, producer, and photographer. He directed a
number of highly acclaimed and often controversial films. Kubrick was noted
for the scrupulous care with which he chose his subjects, his slow method of
working, the variety of genres he worked in, his technical perfectionism, and
his reclusiveness about his films and personal life.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life
  * 2 Film career and later life
    * 2.1 Early works
    * 2.2 Fear and Desire
    * 2.3 Killer's Kiss
    * 2.4 The Killing
    * 2.5 Paths of Glory
    * 2.6 Marriage to Christiane Harlan
    * 2.7 Spartacus
    * 2.8 Move to England
    * 2.9 Lolita
    * 2.10 Dr. Strangelove
    * 2.11 2001: A Space Odyssey
    * 2.12 A Clockwork Orange
    * 2.13 Barry Lyndon
    * 2.14 The Shining
    * 2.15 Full Metal Jacket
    * 2.16 Eyes Wide Shut
  * 3 Death
  * 4 Projects Kubrick did not complete
    * 4.1 Abandoned projects completed by others
      * 4.1.1 One-Eyed Jacks
      * 4.1.2 A.I.: Artificial Intelligence
    * 4.2 Early unrealised screenplays
      * 4.2.1 The Burning Secret and Natural Child
      * 4.2.2 Lunatic at Large
      * 4.2.3 The German Lieutenant
      * 4.2.4 I Stole 16 Million Dollars
      * 4.2.5 Untitled Civil War project
    * 4.3 Later projects stopped after preproduction planning
      * 4.3.1 Napoleon
      * 4.3.2 Aryan Papers
    * 4.4 Story outline only
      * 4.4.1 Untitled Nazi-era project
    * 4.5 Author rebuff
      * 4.5.1 Foucault's Pendulum
    * 4.6 Projects entertained, but without significant development
      * 4.6.1 Blue Movie
      * 4.6.2 Perfume
  * 5 The Spy Who Loved Me
  * 6 Frequent collaborators
  * 7 Family cameos
  * 8 Later versions of source material for Kubrick films
  * 9 Trademarks
  * 10 Legacy
  * 11 Character
  * 12 Politics
  * 13 Religion
  * 14 Aspect ratio
  * 15 Filmography
  * 16 See also
  * 17 References
    * 17.1 Notes
    * 17.2 Further reading
    * 17.3 Documentary
  * 18 External links

  
## [edit] Early life

Stanley Kubrick was born on July 26, 1928 at the Lying-In Hospital in
Manhattan, the first of two children born to Jacques Leonard Kubrick
(1901â85) and his wife Gertrude (nÃ©e Perveler; 1903â85). His sister,
Barbara, was born in 1934. Jacques Kubrick, whose parents were of Jewish
Austro-Hungarian and Polish[1] origin, was a doctor. At Stanley's birth, the
Kubricks lived in an apartment at 2160 Clinton Ave. in The Bronx.[2]

Kubrick's father taught him chess at age twelve, and the game remained a
lifelong obsession.[2] He also bought his son a Graflex camera when he was
thirteen, triggering a fascination with still photography. As a teenager,
Kubrick was interested in jazz, and briefly attempted a career as a
drummer.[2]

Kubrick attended William Howard Taft High School from 1941â45. He was a poor
student, with a meager 67 grade average.[3] He graduated from high school in
1945, and his poor grades, combined with the demand for college admissions
from soldiers returning from the Second World War, eliminated any hopes of
higher education. Later in life, Kubrick spoke disdainfully of his education
and of education in general, maintaining that nothing about school interested
him.[2] His parents sent him to live with relatives for a year in Los Angeles
in the hopes that it would help his academic growth.

While still in high school, he was chosen official school photographer for a
year. In 1946, he briefly attended City College of New York (CCNY) and then
left. Eventually, he sought jobs as a freelance photographer, and by
graduation, he had sold a photographic series to Look magazine. Kubrick
supplemented his income by playing chess "for quarters" in Washington Square
Park and various Manhattan chess clubs.[4] He became an apprentice
photographer for Look in 1946, and later a full-time staff photographer. (Many
early [1945â50] photographs by Kubrick have been published in the book Drama
and Shadows [2005, Phaidon Press] and also appear as a special feature on the
2007 Special Edition DVD of 2001: A Space Odyssey.)

During his Look magazine years, Kubrick married Toba Metz (b. 1930) on May 29,
1948. They lived in Greenwich Village, eventually divorcing in 1951. During
this time, Kubrick began frequenting film screenings at the Museum of Modern
Art and the cinemas of New York City. He was particularly inspired by the
complex, fluid camerawork of director Max OphÃ¼ls, whose films influenced
Kubrick's later visual style.

## [edit] Film career and later life

### [edit] Early works

In 1951, Kubrick's friend Alex Singer persuaded him to start making short
documentaries for The March of Time, a provider of newsreels to movie
theatres. Kubrick agreed, and shot the independently financed Day of the Fight
in 1951. The film notably employed a reverse tracking shot, which would become
one of Kubrick's signature camera movements.[5] Although its distributor went
out of business that year, Kubrick sold Day of the Fight to RKO Pictures for a
profit of $100.[6] Inspired by this early success, Kubrick quit his job at
Look magazine and began working on his second short documentary, Flying Padre
(1951), funded by RKO. A third film, The Seafarers (1953), Kubrick's first
color film, was a 30-minute promotional film for the Seafarers' International
Union. These three films constitute Kubrick's only surviving work in the
documentary genre. However, it is believed that he was involved in other
shorts, which have been lostâmost notably World Assembly of Youth (1952).[7]
He also served as second unit director on an episode of the Omnibus television
program about the life of Abraham Lincoln. None of these shorts has ever been
officially released, though they have been widely bootlegged, and clips are
used in the documentary Stanley Kubrick: A Life In Pictures. In addition, Day
of the Fight and Flying Padre have been shown on TCM as part of a festival of
short films.

### [edit] Fear and Desire

Main article: Fear and Desire

Kubrick moved to narrative feature films with Fear and Desire (1953), the
story of a team of soldiers caught behind enemy lines in a fictional war.
Kubrick and his then-wife, Toba Metz, were the only crew on the film, which
was written by Kubrick's friend Howard Sackler, who later became a successful
playwright. Fear and Desire garnered respectable reviews but was a commercial
failure. In later life, Kubrick was embarrassed by the film, which he
dismissed as an amateur effort. He refused to allow Fear and Desire to be
shown at retrospectives and public screenings and did everything possible to
keep it out of circulation.[8] At least one copy remained in the hands of a
private collector, and the film subsequently surfaced on VHS and later on DVD.

### [edit] Killer's Kiss

Main article: Killer's Kiss

Kubrick's marriage to Toba Metz ended during the making of Fear and Desire. He
met his second wife, Austrian-born dancer and theatrical designer Ruth
Sobotka, in 1952. They lived together in the East Village from 1952 until
their marriage on January 15, 1955. They moved to Hollywood that summer.
Sobotka, who made a cameo appearance in Kubrick's next film, Killer's Kiss
(1954), also served as art director on The Killing (1956). Like Fear and
Desire, Killer's Kiss is a short feature film, with a running time of slightly
more than an hour. It met with limited commercial and critical success. The
film is about a young heavyweight boxer at the end of his career who is
involved with organized crime. Both Fear and Desire and Killer's Kiss were
privately funded by Kubrick's family and friends.[9][10]

### [edit] The Killing

Main article: The Killing

<IMG>

<IMG>

Although film noir had peaked in the 1940s, both the plot and cinematography
of The Killing strongly evoked that genre, and it is now regarded as one of
the best of that kind. Note the use of shadows and cigarette smoke; note also
the resemblance of the mask to those used in A Clockwork Orange.

Alex Singer introduced Kubrick to a young producer named James B. Harris, and
the two became close friends.[11] Their business partnership, Harris-Kubrick
Productions, would finance Kubrick's next three films. The two bought the
rights to a Lionel White novel called Clean Break, which Kubrick and
coscreenwriter Jim Thompson turned into a story about a race track robbery
gone wrong. Starring Sterling Hayden, The Killing was Kubrick's first full-
length feature film, shot with a professional cast and crew. The resulting
film was unusual in 1950s American cinema in that it had a nonlinear storyline
(in a manner imitated nearly 40 years later by director Quentin Tarantino in
Pulp Fiction) and an unhappy ending. In many ways, it followed the conventions
of film noir, both in its plotting and cinematography style. That kind of
crime caper film had peaked in the 1940s; but today, many regard this film as
one of the best of the noir genre.[12] While it was not a financial success,
it received good reviews.[13]

The widespread admiration for The Killing brought Harris-Kubrick Productions
to the attention of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.[14] The studio offered them its
massive collection of copyrighted stories from which to choose their next
project. During this time, Kubrick also collaborated with Calder Willingham on
an adaptation of the Austrian novel The Burning Secret. Although Kubrick was
enthusiastic about the project, it was eventually shelved.[15]

### [edit] Paths of Glory

Main article: Paths of Glory

<IMG>

<IMG>

Long before it became film fashion after the Vietnam era, Kubrick portrayed
war as brutal, using stark black-and-white images in Paths of Glory.

Kubrick's next film was set during World War I and based on Humphrey Cobb's
1935 antiwar novel of the same name. It is about a French army unit ordered on
an impossible mission by their superiors. As a result of the mission's
failure, three innocent soldiers are charged with cowardice, as an example to
the other troops. Kirk Douglas was cast as Colonel Dax, a humanitarian officer
who tries to prevent the soldiers' execution. Douglas was instrumental in
securing financing for the ambitious production. The film was not a
significant commercial success, but it was critically acclaimed and widely
admired within the industry, establishing Kubrick as a major up-and-coming
young filmmaker. Critics over the years have praised the film's unsentimental,
spare, and unvarnished combat scenes and its raw black-and-white
cinematography.[16] Steven Spielberg has named this one of his favorite
Kubrick films. [17]

### [edit] Marriage to Christiane Harlan

During the production of Paths of Glory in Munich, Kubrick met and romanced
young German actress Christiane Harlan (credited by her stage name, "Susanne
Christian"), who played the only female speaking part in the film. Kubrick
divorced his second wife, Ruth Sobotka, in 1957. Christiane Susanne Harlan (b.
1932 in Germany) belonged to a theatrical family and had trained as an
actress. She and Kubrick married in 1958 and remained together until his death
in 1999. During her marriage to Kubrick, Christiane concentrated on a career
as a painter.[18] In addition to raising Christiane's young daughter Katharina
(b. 1953) from her first marriage to the late German actor Werner Bruhns (d.
1977), the couple had two daughters, Anya (b. 1958) and Vivian (b. 1960).
Christiane's brother Jan Harlan was Kubrick's executive producer from 1975
onward.

### [edit] Spartacus

Main article: Spartacus (film)

<IMG>

<IMG>

While Douglas and Kubrick worked on Paths of Glory, Kubrick was both the
film's director and executive producer. But on Spartacus, Douglas, in addition
to being lead actor, was executive producer, making Kubrick's directorial role
subordinate. They meshed well on the first film, but Spartacus severed their
earlier bond.

Upon his return to the United States, Kubrick worked for six months on the
Marlon Brando vehicle One-Eyed Jacks (1961). The two clashed over a number of
casting decisions, and Brando eventually fired him and decided to direct the
picture himself.[19] Kubrick worked on a number of unproduced screenplays[20]
until Kirk Douglas asked him to take over Douglas' epic production Spartacus
(1960) from Anthony Mann, who had been fired by the studio two weeks into
shooting.

Based upon the true story of a doomed uprising of Roman slaves, Spartacus was
a difficult production. Creative differences arose between Kubrick and
Douglas, and the two reportedly had a stormy working relationship. Frustrated
by his lack of creative control, Kubrick later largely disowned the film,
which further angered Douglas.[21] The friendship the two men had formed on
Paths of Glory was destroyed by the experience of making the film. Years
later, Douglas referred to Kubrick as "a talented shit."[22]

Despite the on-set troubles, Spartacus was a major critical and commercial
success and established Kubrick as a major director. However, its embattled
production convinced Kubrick to find ways of working with Hollywood financing
while remaining independent of its production system, which he called "film by
fiat, film by frenzy."[23]

Spartacus is the only Stanley Kubrick film in which Kubrick had no hand in the
screenplay, no final cut, no producing credit, nor any say in the casting. It
is largely Kirk Douglas' project.

### [edit] Move to England

In 1962, Kubrick moved to England to film Lolita, and he would live there for
the rest of his life. The original motivation was to film Lolita in a country
with laxer censorship laws. However, Kubrick had to remain in England to film
Doctor Strangelove since Peter Sellers was not permitted to leave England at
the time, and the filming of 2001: A Space Odyssey required the large capacity
of the sound stages of Shepperton studios, which were not available in
America. It was after filming the first two of these films in England and in
the early planning stages of Odyssey that Kubrick decided to settle in England
permanently.

### [edit] Lolita

Main article: Lolita (1962 film)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Lolita was one of most controversial novels of the century, given its theme.
Here, Lolita kisses her stepfather Humbert goodnight while he plays chess with
her mother (Shelley Winters).

The film was Kubrick's first major controversy.[24] The book, by Russian-
American novelist Vladimir Nabokov, dealt with an affair between a middle-aged
man named Humbert Humbert (James Mason) and his twelve-year-old stepdaughter,
and was already notorious as an "obscene" novel and a cause celebre when
Kubrick embarked on the project. The difficult subject matter was mocked in
the film's famous tagline, "How did they ever make a film of Lolita?" Kubrick
originally engaged Nabokov to adapt his own novel for the screen. The writer
first produced a 400-page screenplay, which he then reduced to 200.[25] The
final screenplay was written by Kubrick himself, and it has been estimated
that only 20% of Nabokov's work made it into the final draft.[26] Nabokov's
original draft was later published under the title Lolita: A Screenplay.

The film faced a censorship battle before its release. Kubrick tried to make
some elements more acceptable by changing Lolita's age from twelve to fourteen
and omitting all material referring to Humbert's lifelong infatuation with
"nymphets." Nonetheless, several scenes in the final film had to be re-edited
to satisfy the censors.[27] As a result, the novel's more perverse aspects
were toned down in the final cut, leaving much to the viewer's imagination.
Kubrick would later say that had he known the severity of the censorship he
would face, he probably would not have made the film.[28]

Lolita was the first of two times Kubrick worked with British comic actor
Peter Sellers, the second being Dr. Strangelove (1964). Sellers' role is that
of Clare Quilty, a second older man unknown to Humbert who is involved with
Lolita, serving dramatically as Humbert's darker doppelganger. In the novel,
Quilty is behind the scenes for most of the story, but Kubrick brings him to
the foreground, which resulted in an expansion of his role (even then running
to only about half an hourâs screen time). Kubrick adds the dramatic device
of Quilty's pretending to be multiple characters, allowing Sellers to employ
his gift for mock accents.

Critical reception of the film was mixed; many praised it for its daring
subject matter, while others were surprised by the lack of intimacy between
Lolita and Humbert. The film received an Academy Award nomination for Best
Adapted Screenplay, and Sue Lyon, who played the title role, won a Golden
Globe for Best Newcomer.

### [edit] Dr. Strangelove

Main article: Dr. Strangelove

<IMG>

<IMG>

Many viewers of the film did not initially realize that Kubrick had cast Peter
Sellers in three roles, all with distinctively different appearances and
accents.

Kubrick's next film, Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and
Love the Bomb (1964), became a cult film and is now considered a classic. The
screenplayâbased upon the novel Red Alert, by ex-RAF flight lieutenant Peter
George (writing as Peter Bryant)âwas cowritten by Kubrick and George, with
contributions by American satirist Terry Southern. Red Alert is a serious,
cautionary tale of accidental atomic war. However, Kubrick found the
conditions leading to nuclear war so absurd that the story became a sinister
macabre comedy.[29] Once so reconceived, Kubrick recruited Terry Southern to
polish the final screenplay.

The story centers on an American nuclear attack on the Soviet Union, initiated
by renegade U.S.A.F. Gen. Jack D. Ripper (Sterling Hayden; the character's
name is a reference to Jack the Ripper) without official authorization. When
Ripper gives his orders, the bombers are all at fail-safe points, before which
passing they cannot arm their warheads, and past which, they cannot proceed
without direct orders. Once past this point, the planes will only return with
a prearranged recall code. The film intercuts between three locales: 1)
Ripper's air force base, where RAF Group Captain Lionel Mandrake (Sellers)
tries to stop the mad Gen. Ripper by obtaining the codes; 2) the Pentagon War
Room, where the President of the United States (Sellers) and U.S.A.F. Gen.
Buck Turgidson (George C. Scott) try to develop a strategy with the Soviets to
stop Gen. Ripper's B-52 bombers from dropping nuclear bombs on Russia; and 3)
Major Kong's (Slim Pickens) B-52 bomber, where he and his crew of airmen
(never knowing their orders are false) doggedly try to complete their mission.
It soon becomes clear that the bombers may reach Russia, since only Gen.
Ripper knows the recall codes. At this point, the character of Dr. Strangelove
(Sellers' third role) is introduced. His Nazi-style plans for ensuring the
survival of the fittest of the human race in the aftermath of a nuclear
holocaust are the black-comedy highlight of the film.

Peter Sellers, who had played a small but pivotal part in Lolita, was hired to
play four roles in Dr. Strangelove. He eventually played three, due to an
injured leg and his difficulty in mastering bomber pilot Major "King" Kong's
Texas accent. Kubrick later called Sellers "amazing," but lamented the fact
that the actor's manic energy rarely lasted beyond two or three takes. To
overcome this problem, Kubrick ran two cameras simultaneously and let Sellers
improvise.[30] Coincidentally, that same year, Columbia Studios released the
dramatic nuclear war thriller Fail-Safe.

The film prefigured the antiwar sentiments of the later 1960s that would
become explosive only a few years after its release. It was highly irreverent
toward war policies of the U.S., which were largely considered sacrosanct up
to that time. The film earned four Academy Award nominations (including Best
Picture and Best Director) and the New York Film Critics' Best Director award.

### [edit] 2001: A Space Odyssey

Main article: 2001: A Space Odyssey (film)

<IMG>

<IMG>

2001 is the first of many Kubrick films to use an all-classical score.
Kubrick's famed opening shot of the Sun, Earth, and Moon is one of several
accompanied by Richard Strauss's majestic fanfarelike Also sprach Zarathustra.
Space flight is accompanied by Johann Strauss's graceful The Blue Danube, and
all appearances of the monolith are accompanied by the unearthly modernistic
Requiem by Gyorgi Ligeti.

Kubrick spent five years developing his next film, 2001: A Space Odyssey
(1968). The film was conceived as a Cinerama spectacle and was photographed in
Super Panavision 70. Kubrick cowrote the screenplay with science fiction
writer Sir Arthur C. Clarke, expanding on Clarke's short story "The Sentinel."
Kubrick reportedly told Clarke that his intention was to make "the proverbial
great science fiction film."

2001 begins four million years ago with an encounter between a group of apes
and a mysterious black monolith, which seems to trigger in them the ability to
use a bone as both a tool and a weapon. Use as the latter allows them to claim
a water hole from another group of apes, who have no tool-wielding ability. A
victorious ape tosses his bone into the air, at which point the film makes a
celebrated jump cut to an orbiting weapons satellite, circa 2000. At this
time, a group of Americans at their moon base have dug up a similar monolith.
Geological evidence indicates that it was deliberately buried four million
years ago. When the sun rises over the monolith, it sends a radio signal to
Jupiter. Eighteen months later, the U.S. sends a group of astronauts aboard
the spaceship Discovery on a mission to Jupiter, the purpose of which is to
investigate the monolith's signal, although this is concealed from the crew.
During the flight, the ship's sentient HAL 9000 computer malfunctions but
resists disconnection, believing its control of the mission to be crucial. The
computer terminates life support for most of the crew before it is
successfully shut down. The surviving astronaut, David Bowman (Keir Dullea),
in a tiny space pod, encounters another monolith in orbit around Jupiter,
whereupon he is hurled into a portal in space at high speed, witnessing many
astronomical phenomena. His interstellar journey concludes with his
transformation into a mysterious new being resembling a fetus enclosed in an
orb of light, last seen gazing at Earth from space.

The film was a massive production for its time. The special effects, then
considered groundbreaking, were overseen by Kubrick and were engineered by a
team that included special effects pioneer Douglas Trumbull (Silent Running,
Blade Runner). Kubrick extensively used traveling matte photography to film
space flight, a technique also used nine years later by George Lucas in making
Star Wars, although that film also used motion-control effects that were
unavailable to Kubrick at the time. Kubrick used an innovative use of slitscan
photography to film the Stargate sequence. The film's striking cinematography
was the work of legendary British director of photography Geoffrey Unsworth,
who would later photograph classic films such as Cabaret and Superman.
Manufacturing companies were consulted as to what the design of both special-
purpose and everyday objects would look like in the future. At the time of the
movie's release, Arthur C. Clarke predicted that a generation of engineers
would design real spacecraft based upon 2001 "â¦even if it isn't the best way
to do it."[citation needed]. The film also is a rare instance of portraying
space travel realistically, with complete silence in the vacuum of space and a
realistic representation of weightlessness.

The film is famous for using classical music in place of an original score.
Richard Strauss's Also sprach Zarathustra and Johann Strauss's The Blue Danube
waltz became for a while indelibly associated with the film, especially the
former, as it was not well-known to the public prior to the film. Kubrick also
used music by contemporary avant-garde Hungarian composer GyÃ¶rgy Ligeti,
although some of the pieces were altered without Ligeti's consent. The
appearance of Atmospheres, Lux Aeterna, and Requiem on the 2001 soundtrack was
the first wide commercial exposure of Ligeti's work. This use of "program"
music was not originally planned. Kubrick had commissioned composer Alex North
to write a full-length score for the film, but Kubrick became so attached to
the temporary soundtrack he had constructed during editing that he dropped the
idea of an original score entirely.[31]

Although it eventually became an enormous success, the film was not an
immediate hit. Initial critical reaction was extremely hostile, with critics
attacking the film's lack of dialogue, slow pacing, and seemingly impenetrable
storyline. One of the film's few defenders was Penelope Gilliatt,[32] who
called it (in the New Yorker) "some kind of a great film." Word of mouth among
young audiencesâespecially the 1960s counterculture audience, who loved the
movie's "Star Gate" sequence, a seemingly psychedelic journey to the infinite
reaches of the cosmosâmade the film a hit. Despite nominations in the
directing, writing, and producing categories, the only Academy Award Kubrick
ever received was for supervising the special effects of 2001: A Space
Odyssey.

Artistically, Odyssey was a radical departure from Kubrick's previous films.
It contains only 45 minutes of spoken dialogue, over a running time of two
hours and twenty minutes. The fairly mundane dialogue is mostly superfluous to
the images and music. The film's most memorable dialogue belongs to the
computer HAL in HAL's exchanges with Dave Bowman. Some argue that Kubrick is
portraying a future humanity largely dissociated from its environment. The
film's ambiguous, perplexing ending continues to fascinate contemporary
audiences and critics. After this film, Kubrick would never experiment so
radically with special effects or narrative form, but his subsequent films
maintain some level of ambiguity.

Interpretations of 2001: A Space Odyssey are numerous and diverse. Despite
having been released in 1968, it still prompts debate today. When critic
Joseph Gelmis asked Kubrick about the meaning of the film, Kubrick
replied:[33]

> They are the areas I prefer not to discuss, because they are highly
subjective and will differ from viewer to viewer. In this sense, the film
becomes anything the viewer sees in it. If the film stirs the emotions and
penetrates the subconscious of the viewer, if it stimulates, however
inchoately, his mythological and religious yearnings and impulses, then it has
succeeded.

2001: A Space Odyssey is perhaps Kubrick's most famous and influential film.
Steven Spielberg called it his generation's big bang,[34] focusing attention
upon the space race. It was a precursor to the explosion of the science
fiction film market nine years later, which began with the release of Star
Wars and Close Encounters of the Third Kind.

### [edit] A Clockwork Orange

Main article: A Clockwork Orange (film)

<IMG>

<IMG>

In A Clockwork Orange, Kubrick continued his innovative use of classical music
begun in 2001: A Space Odyssey. However, instead of accompanying graceful
space flight, the music accompanied violence and rape. The slow-motion fight
scene about to commence is choreographed to Rossini's overture to "The
Thieving Magpie."

After 2001, Kubrick initially attempted to make a film about the life of
Napoleon Bonaparte. When financing fell through, Kubrick went looking for a
project that he could film quickly on a small budget. He eventually settled on
A Clockwork Orange (1971). His adaptation of Anthony Burgess' novel is a dark,
shocking exploration of violence in human society. The film was initially
released with an X rating in the United States and caused considerable
controversy. The film's iconic poster imagery was created by legendary
designer Bill Gold.

The story takes place in a futuristic version of Great Britain that is both
authoritarian and chaotic. The central character is a teenage hooligan named
Alex DeLarge (Malcolm McDowell), who gleefully torments, beats, robs,
tortures, and rapes without conscience or remorse. His brutal beating and
murder of an older woman finally lands Alex in prison. Alex undergoes an
experimental medical aversion treatment that inhibits his violent tendencies,
though he has no real free moral choice. At the public demonstration of the
success of the technique, Alex is treated cruelly but does not fight back; the
treatment has made him less than human. He has been conditioned against
classical music, his love of which was his one human feature, and apparently
all of his sex drive is gone. We further see hints that the promotion of the
treatment is politically motivated. After being freed, he is found by former
partners in crime of his whom he betrayed and who are now policemen, and they
beat him mercilessly. He then comes to the home of a political writer who
disdains "the modern age" and is initially sympathetic to Alex's plight until
he recognizes Alex as the young man who brutally raped his wife and paralyzed
him a few years before. Alex then becomes a pawn in a political game.

The society was sometimes perceived as Communist (as Michael Ciment pointed
out in an interview with Kubrick, although he himself didn't feel that way)
due to its slight ties to Russian culture. The teenage slang has a heavily
Russian vocabulary, which can be attributed to Burgess. There is some evidence
to suggest that the society is a socialist one, or at least a society moving
out of a failed, Leftist socialism and into a Rightist or fascist society. In
the novel, streets have paintings of working men in the style of Russian
socialist art, and in the film, there is a mural of socialist artwork with
obscenities drawn on it. As well, Alex's residence was shot on actual failed
Labour party architecture (as Malcolm McDowell points out on the DVD
commentary), and the name "Municipal Flat Block 18A, Linear North" alludes to
socialist-style housing. Later in the film, when the new right wing government
takes power, the atmosphere is certainly more authoritarian than the anarchist
air of the beginning. Kubrick's response to Ciment's question remained
ambiguous as to exactly what kind of society it is. He held that the film held
comparisons between both the left and right end of the political spectrum and
that there is little difference between the two. Kubrick stated, "The
Minister, played by Anthony Sharp, is clearly a figure of the Right. The
writer, Patrick Magee, is a lunatic of the Left. ...They differ only in their
dogma. Their means and ends are hardly distinguishable."[35]

Kubrick photographed A Clockwork Orange quickly and almost entirely on
location in and around London. Despite the low-tech nature of the film as
compared to 2001: A Space Odyssey, Kubrick showed his talent for innovation;
at one point, he threw an Arriflex camera off a rooftop in order to achieve
the effect he wanted. For the score, Kubrick enlisted electronic music
composer Wendy Carlosâat the time, known as Walter Carlos (Switched-On
Bach)âto adapt famous classical works (such as Beethoven's Ninth Symphony)
for the Moog synthesizer.

The film was extremely controversial because of its explicit depiction of
teenage gang rape and violence. It was released in the same year as Sam
Peckinpah's Straw Dogs and Don Siegel's Dirty Harry, and the three films
sparked a ferocious debate in the media about the social effects of cinematic
violence. The controversy was exacerbated when copycat crimes were committed
in England by criminals wearing the same costumes as characters in A Clockwork
Orange. British readers of the novel noted that Kubrick had omitted the final
chapter (also omitted from American editions of the book) in which Alex finds
redemption and sanity.

It is pivotal to the plot that the lead character, Alex, is fond of classical
music, and that the brainwashing Ludovico treatment accidentally conditions
him against classical music. As such, it was natural for Kubrick to continue
the tradition begun in 2001: A Space Odyssey of using a great deal of
classical music in the score. However, in this film, classical music
accompanies scenes of violent mayhem and coercive sexuality rather than of
graceful space flight and mysterious alien presences. Both Pauline Kael (who
generally disliked Kubrick) and Roger Ebert (who often praises Kubrick) found
Kubrick's use of juxtaposing classical music and violence in this film
unpleasant, Ebert calling it a "cute, cheap, dead-end dimension,"[36] and
Kael, "self-important."[37] However, novelist Anthony Burgess, in his
introduction to his own stage adaptation of the novel, held that ultimately,
classical music is what will finally redeem Alex.

After receiving death threats to himself and his family as a result of the
controversy, Kubrick took the unusual step of removing the film from
circulation in Britain. It was unavailable in the United Kingdom until its re-
release in 2000, a year after Kubrick's death, although it could be seen in
continental Europe. The Scala cinema in London's Kings Cross showed the film
in the early 1990s, and at Kubrick's insistence, the cinema was sued and put
out of business, thus depriving London of one of its very few independent
cinemas. It is now a club.[38]

In the mid-1990s, a documentary entitled Forbidden Fruit, about the censorship
controversy, was released in Britain. Kubrick was unable to prevent the
documentary makers from including footage from A Clockwork Orange in their
film.

### [edit] Barry Lyndon

Main article: Barry Lyndon

<IMG>

<IMG>

Special lenses were developed for Barry Lyndon to allow filming using only
natural light.

Kubrick's next film, released in 1975, was an adaptation of William Makepeace
Thackeray's The Luck of Barry Lyndon, also known as Barry Lyndon, a picaresque
novel about the adventures and misadventures of an 18th-century Irish gambler
and social climber. After serving in the Prussian army, Lyndon slowly
insinuates himself into English high society, eventually marrying the Countess
of Lyndon. The world of the aristocracy turns out to be a hollow paradise,
dull and decaying. Lyndon is ultimately unable to maintain his good standing
there and falls from grace after a series of persecutions.

Some critics, especially Pauline Kael (one of Kubrick's greatest detractors),
found Barry Lyndon a cold, slow-moving, and lifeless film. Its measured pace
and lengthâmore than three hoursâput off many American critics and
audiences, although it received positive reviews from Rex Reed and Richard
Schickel. Time magazine published a cover story about the film, and Kubrick
was nominated for three Academy Awards. The film was nominated for seven
Academy Awards and won four, more than any other Kubrick film. Despite this,
Barry Lyndon was not a box office success in the U.S., although the film found
a great audience in Europe, particularly in France.

As with most of Kubrick's films, Barry Lyndon's reputation has grown through
the years, particularly among other filmmakers. Director Martin Scorsese has
cited it as his favorite Kubrick film. Steven Spielberg has praised its
"impeccable technique," though, when younger, he famously described it "like
going through the Prado without lunch."[39]

As in his other films, Kubrick's cinematography and lighting techniques were
highly innovative. Most famously, interior scenes were shot with a specially
adapted high-speed Zeiss camera lens originally developed for NASA. This
allowed many scenes to be lit only with candlelight, creating two-dimensional
diffused-light images reminiscent of 18th-century paintings.

Like its two predecessors, the film does not have an original score. Irish
traditional songs (performed by The Chieftains) are combined with works such
as Antonio Vivaldi's Cello Concerto in B, a Johann Sebastian Bach Double
Concerto, George Frideric Handel's Sarabande from the Keyboard Suite in D
minor (HWV 448, HG II/ii/4), and Franz Schubert's German Dance No. 1 in C
major, Piano Trio No. 2 in E flat, and Impromptu No. 1 in C minor. The music
was conducted and adapted by Leonard Rosenman, for which he won an Oscar.

### [edit] The Shining

Main article: The Shining (film)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kubrick's film was the second to make notably innovative use of the Steadicam,
which can track motion smoothly without a dolly track.

The pace of Kubrick's work slowed considerably after Barry Lyndon, and he did
not make another film for five years. The Shining, released in 1980, was
adapted from the novel of the same name by bestselling horror writer Stephen
King. The film starred Jack Nicholson as Jack Torrance, a failed writer who
takes a job as an off-season caretaker of the Overlook Hotel, a high-class
resort deep in the Colorado mountains. The job requires spending the winter in
the isolated hotel with his wife, Wendy (played by Shelley Duvall) and their
young son, Danny, who is gifted with a form of telepathyâthe "shining" of
the film's title.

As winter takes hold, the family's isolation deepens, and the demons and
ghosts of the Overlook Hotel's dark past begin to awake. The hotel displays
increasingly horrible, phantasmagoric images to Danny. Meanwhile, Jack is
slowly driven mad by the haunted surroundings until he finally collapses into
homicidal psychosis.

The film was shot entirely on London soundstages, with the exception of
second-unit exterior footage, which was filmed in Colorado, Montana, and
Oregon. In order to convey the claustrophobic oppression of the haunted hotel,
Kubrick made extensive use of the newly invented Steadicam, a weight-balanced
camera support, which allowed for smooth camera movement in enclosed spaces.

More than any of his other films, The Shining gave rise to the legend of
Kubrick as a megalomanic perfectionist. Reportedly, he demanded hundreds of
takes of certain scenes (approximately 1.3 million feet of film was shot).
This process was particularly difficult for actress Shelley Duvall, who was
used to the faster, improvisational style of director Robert Altman.

Stephen King disliked the movie, calling Kubrick "a man who thinks too much
and feels too little."[40] In 1997, King collaborated with Mick Garris to
create a television miniseries version of the novel that was more faithful to
King's original.

The film opened to mostly negative reviews, but proved a commercial success.
As with most Kubrick films, subsequent critical reaction has treated the film
more favorably. Among horror movie fans, The Shining is a cult classic, often
appearing at the top of best horror film lists alongside Psycho (1960), The
Exorcist (1973) and Halloween (1978). Some of its images, such as an antique
elevator disgorging a tidal wave of blood, are among the most recognizable and
widely known images from any Stanley Kubrick film. The financial success of
The Shining renewed Warner Brothers' faith in Kubrick's ability to make
artistically satisfying and profitable films after the commercial failure of
Barry Lyndon in the United States.

### [edit] Full Metal Jacket

Main article: Full Metal Jacket

<IMG>

<IMG>

Reviewers noted that unlike most Vietnam war films set in lush jungle
environments, Kubrick made a mainly urban Vietnam film set around bombed-out
buildings, giving this war film a more distinctively grim and bleak quality.

It was seven years until Kubrick's next film, Full Metal Jacket (1987), an
adaptation of Gustav Hasford's Vietnam War novel The Short-Timers, starring
Matthew Modine as Joker, Adam Baldwin as Animal Mother, R. Lee Ermey as
Gunnery Sergeant Hartman, and Vincent D'Onofrio as Private Leonard "Gomer
Pyle" Lawrence. Kubrick said to film critic Gene Siskel that his attraction to
Gustav Hasford's book was because it was "neither antiwar or prowar," held "no
moral or political position," and was primarily concerned with "the way things
are."

The film begins at Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island, South Carolina,
U.S., where Senior Drill Instructor Gunnery Sergeant Hartman relentlessly
pushes his recruits through basic training in order to transform them from
worthless "maggots" into killer Marines. Private Lawrence, an overweight,
slow-witted recruit who Hartman has nicknamed "Gomer Pyle," is unable to cope
with the program and slowly cracks under the strain. On the eve of graduation,
he has a psychotic breakdown and murders Hartman before killing himself.

The second half of the film follows Joker, since promoted to sergeant, as he
tries to stay sane in Vietnam. As a reporter for the United States Military's
newspaper, the Stars and Stripes, Joker occupies war's middle ground, using
wit and sarcasm to detach himself from the carnage around him. Though a
soldier at war, he is also a reporter and is thus compelled to abide by the
ethics of his profession. The film then follows an infantry platoon's advance
on and through Hue City, decimated by the Tet Offensive. The film climaxes in
a battle between Joker's platoon and a sniper hiding in the rubble, who is
revealed to be a young girl. She almost kills Joker until his reporter partner
shoots and severely injures her. Joker then kills her to put her out of her
misery.

Filming a Vietnam War film in England was a considerable challenge for Kubrick
and his production team. Much of the filming was done in the Docklands area of
London, with the ruined-city set created by production designer Anton Furst.
As a result, the film is visually very different from other Vietnam War films
such as Platoon and Hamburger Hill, most of which were shot in the Far East.
Instead of a tropical, Southeast-Asian jungle, the second half of the story
unfolds in a city, illuminating the urban warfare aspect of a war generally
portrayed (and thus perceived) as jungle warfare, notwithstanding significant
urban skirmishes like the Tet offensive. Reviewers and commentators thought
this contributed to the bleakness and seriousness of the film.[41] [42]

Full Metal Jacket received mixed critical reviews but also found a reasonably
large audience, despite being overshadowed by Oliver Stone's Platoon and Clint
Eastwood's Heartbreak Ridge.

### [edit] Eyes Wide Shut

Main article: Eyes Wide Shut

<IMG>

<IMG>

The casting of real-life celebrity couple Nicole Kidman and Tom Cruise as a
married couple in a film rumored (correctly) to have a sexually charged plot
fueled wild speculations about the film's content.

Kubrick's final film was Eyes Wide Shut, starring then-married actors Tom
Cruise and Nicole Kidman as a wealthy Manhattan couple on a sexual odyssey.

The story of Eyes Wide Shut is based on Arthur Schnitzler's Freudian novella
Traumnovelle (Dream Story in English), although the story has been ported from
Vienna in the 1920s to New York City in the 1990s. It follows Dr. William
Harford's journey into the sexual underworld of New York City, after his wife,
Alice, has shattered his faith in her fidelity by confessing to having
fantasized about giving him and their daughter up for one night with another
man. Until then, Harford had presumed women are more naturally faithful than
men. This new revelation generates doubt and despair, and he begins to roam
the streets of New York, acting blindly on his jealousy.

After trespassing upon the rituals of a sinister, mysterious sexual cult, Dr.
Harford thinks twice before seeking sexual revenge against his wife. Upon
returning home, he discovers his wife has had a dream about making love to
several men at once, concerning which fantasy she has conflicted feelings.
After his own dangerous escapades, Dr. Harford has no high moral ground over
her. The couple begin to patch their relationship.

The film was in production for more than two years, and two of the main
members of the cast, Harvey Keitel and Jennifer Jason Leigh, were replaced in
the course of the filming. Although it is set in New York City, the film was
mostly shot on London soundstages, with little location shooting. Shots of
Manhattan itself were pickup shots filmed in New York City by a second-unit
crew. Because of Kubrick's secrecy about the film, mostly inaccurate rumors
abounded about its plot and content. Most especially, the story's sexual
content provoked speculation, some journalists writing that it would be "the
sexiest film ever made."[43] The casting of celebrity-actor couple Tom Cruise
and Nicole Kidman as a husband-wife couple in the film increased the
prerelease journalistic hyperbole.

Eyes Wide Shut, like Lolita and A Clockwork Orange before it, faced censorship
before release. In the United States and Canada, digitally manufactured
silhouette figures were strategically placed to mask explicit copulation
scenes so as to secure an R rating from the MPAA. In Europe, and the rest of
the world, the film has been released uncut, in its original form. The October
2007 DVD reissue contains the uncut version, making it available to North
American audiences for the first time.

## [edit] Death

In 1999âfour days after screening a final cut of Eyes Wide Shut for his
family, the lead actor and actress, and Warner Brothers executivesâ70-year-
old Kubrick died of a heart attack in his sleep. He was buried next to his
favorite tree in Childwickbury Manor, Hertfordshire, England, U.K.[44]

## [edit] Projects Kubrick did not complete

### [edit] Abandoned projects completed by others

Stanley Kubrick worked on two projects eventually completed by other
directors. On One-Eyed Jacks, he was hired from the outside, as had been the
case with Spartacus. The film A.I. was completed after his death by Steven
Spielberg.

#### [edit] One-Eyed Jacks

Main article: One-Eyed Jacks

The Hollywood Reporter announced on October 18, 1956 that producer Frank
Rosenberg had bought rights to Charles Neiderâs novel The Authentic Death of
Hendry Jones for $40,000. Two years later, Pennebaker Inc., Marlon Brandoâs
independent production company, bought the rights to the novel as well as Sam
Peckinpahâs first-draft screenplay adaptation for $150,000. Even at this
time, it was announced that Brando might direct.

Later that same year, Kubrick was announced as director of Gunâs Up, the
working title for the production. Shortly after this announcement, the name of
the film was changed to One-Eyed Jacks, and Pina Pellicer was announced as
"the unanimous choice of Brando, Rosenberg, and Kubrick" to play the female
lead.

On November 20, 1958, Kubrick quit as director of One-Eyed Jacks, stating that
he had the utmost respect for Marlon Brando as one of "the worldâs foremost
artists"[45] but had recently acquired the rights to Nabokovâs Lolita and
wanted to begin production work immediately in light of this wonderful
opportunity.

The film was completed with directorial credit given to Marlon Brando.

#### [edit] A.I.: Artificial Intelligence

Main article: A.I.: Artificial Intelligence

One Kubrick project was eventually completed by another director, Steven
Spielberg. Throughout the 1980s and early '90s, Kubrick collaborated with
various writers (including Brian Aldiss, Sara Maitland and Ian Watson) on a
project called by various names, including "Pinocchio" and "Artificial
Intelligence."

The film was developed expanding on Aldiss' short story "Super-Toys Last All
Summer Long," which Kubrick and his writers turned into a feature-length film
in three acts. It was a futuristic fairy tale about a robot that resembles and
behaves as a child, who is sold as a temporary surrogate to a family whose
only son is in a coma. The robot, however, learns of this, and out of sympathy
is left abandoned in the woods by his owners instead of being returned to the
factory for destruction. The rest of the story concerns the robot's attempts
to become a real boy by seeking "Blue Fairy" (a reference to Pinocchio) in
order to regain his mother's love and acceptance once more, as his love was
hard-wired into him and hence everlasting. The journey would take the boy-
robot (referred to as a "Mecha" ) thousands of years.

Kubrick reportedly held long telephone discussions with Steven Spielberg
regarding the film, and, according to Spielberg, at one point stated that the
subject matter was closer to Spielberg's sensibilities than his.[46] In 2001,
following Kubrick's death, Spielberg took the various drafts and notes left by
Kubrick and his writers and composed a new screenplay, and in association with
what remained of Kubrick's production unit, made the movie A.I.: Artificial
Intelligence, starring Haley Joel Osment, Frances O'Connor, and William Hurt.

The film contains a posthumous producing credit for Stanley Kubrick at the
beginning, and the brief dedication "For Stanley Kubrick" at the end. The film
contains many recurrent Kubrick motifs, such as an omniscient narrator, an
extreme form of the three act structure, the themes of humanity and
inhumanity, and a sardonic view of Freudian psychology. In addition, John
Williams' score contains allusions to pieces heard in other Kubrick films.

### [edit] Early unrealised screenplays

Early in his career, Kubrick either commissioned or wrote screenplays he was
not able to get off the ground.

#### [edit] The Burning Secret and Natural Child

In 1956, after MGM turned down Harris and Kubrick's request to film Paths of
Glory, they invited him to look through their other properties. Harris and
Kubrick discovered Stefan Zweig's novel The Burning Secret, a tale published
after World War I, about a young baron who tries to seduce a young Jewish
woman by first befriending her twelve-year-old son, who eventually detects
what the baron wants. Kubrick was very excited about this novel, and hired
novelist Calder Willingham to produce a screenplay, but Production Code
restrictions made the project impossible.[47]

Kubrick had earlier been interested in adapting the same Calder Willingham
novel Natural Child, but quickly realized it could not be done within the
Production Code.[48]

#### [edit] Lunatic at Large

On November 1, 2006, Philip Hobbs, Kubrick's son-in-law, announced that he
would be shepherding a film treatment of Lunatic at Large, which was
commissioned by Kubrick for treatment from noir pulp novelist Jim Thompson in
the 1950s but had become lost until Kubrick's death in 1999.[49]

#### [edit] The German Lieutenant

A screenplay attributed to Kubrick (and one Richard Adams called The German
Lieutenant) can be found online.[50] It is about a German group of soldiers
sent on a mission during the final days of World War II, despite odds being
against Nazi Germany at the time.

#### [edit] I Stole 16 Million Dollars

Kubrick planned to direct a film called I Stole 16 Million Dollars, based on
notorious 1930s bank robber Willie Sutton.[51] It was to be made by Kirk
Douglas' Bryna production company, but Douglas thought the script was poorly
written. Although Kubrick tried to get Cary Grant interested, the film was
never made.

#### [edit] Untitled Civil War project

In the 1950s, Kubrick wrote a draft of a screenplay about the Mosby Rangers, a
Southern guerilla force in the Civil War, but did not pursue it after the
first draft.[52]

### [edit] Later projects stopped after preproduction planning

An exacting perfectionist who often worked for years on preproduction planning
and research, Kubrick had a number of unrealised projects during his career.

#### [edit] Napoleon

After the success of 2001, Kubrick planned a large-scale biopic of Napoleon
Bonaparte.[53] He did much research, read books about the French Emperor, and
wrote a preliminary screenplay. With assistants, he meticulously created a
card catalogue of the places and deeds of Napoleon's inner circle during its
operative years. Kubrick scouted locations, planning to film large portions of
the story in the historical places where Napoleon's life occurred.

In notes to his financial backers, preserved in The Kubrick Archives, Kubrick
told them he was unsure how his Napoleon film would turn out but that he
expected to create "the best movie ever made." Ultimately, the project was
canceled for three reasons: 1) the prohibitive cost of location filming; 2)
the release, in the West, of Sergei Bondarchuk's epic film version of Leo
Tolstoy's novel War and Peace (1968), and 3) the commercial failure of
Bondarchuk's Napoleon-themed film Waterloo (1970). Stanley Kubrick's
screenplay for this film has been published on the Internet. Much of his
historical research would influence Barry Lyndon (1975), set in the late 18th
century, just before Napoleon's wars.

The film was originally to star Jack Nicholson as Napoleon after Kubrick saw
him in Easy Rider. Kubrick and Nicholson eventually worked together on The
Shining. After years of preproduction, the movie was set aside indefinitely in
favor of more economically feasible projects. As late as 1987, Kubrick stated
that he had not given up on the project, mentioning that he had read almost
500 books on the historical figure. He was convinced that a film worthy of the
subject had not yet appeared.

#### [edit] Aryan Papers

As early as 1976, Stanley Kubrick wanted to make a film about the Holocaust.
He tried to persuade Isaac Bashevis Singer to contribute an original
screenplay. What Kubrick sought from Singer was a "dramatic structure that
compressed the complex and vast information into the story of an individual
who represented the essence of this man-made hell." Singer declined, saying,
"I don't know the first thing about the Holocaust."[54] In the early 1990s,
Kubrick almost went into production on a film of Louis Begley's Wartime Lies,
the story of a boy and his aunt in hiding during the Holocaust. The first-
draft screenplay, titled "Aryan Papers," had been penned by Kubrick himself.
Full Metal Jacket coscreenwriter Michael Herr reports that Kubrick had
considered casting Julia Roberts, and Uma Thurman as the aunt. Eventually,
Johanna ter Steege was cast as the aunt, and Joseph Mazzello was cast as the
young boy, and Kubrick traveled to the Czech city of Brno as a possible
location for wartime Warsaw. But Kubrick chose not to make the film due to the
release of Steven Spielberg's Holocaust-themed Schindler's List in 1993. In
addition, according to Kubrick's wife, Christiane, the subject itself had
become too depressing and difficult for the director. Kubrick eventually
concluded that an accurate film about the Holocaust was beyond the capacity of
cinema and abandoned the project in 1995 and turned his attention back to
A.I.[55]

### [edit] Story outline only

#### [edit] Untitled Nazi-era project

Kubrick is also reported to have been fascinated by the career of Nazi
filmmaker Veit Harlan, an uncle of his wife, and to have contemplated a film
on the circle around Joseph Goebbels. Although Kubrick worked on it for
several years, this never got further than a rough story outline.[56]

### [edit] Author rebuff

#### [edit] Foucault's Pendulum

Kubrick wanted to make a film based on Umberto Eco's novel Foucault's
Pendulum, which appeared in 1988. Unfortunately, Eco refused, as he was
dissatisfied with the filming of his earlier novel The Name of the Rose and
also because Kubrick wasn't willing to let him write the screenplay himself.
However, when Kubrick died, Eco regretted having rebuffed him.[57]

### [edit] Projects entertained, but without significant development

#### [edit] Blue Movie

Before moving onto 2001: A Space Odyssey, Terry Southern had suggested to
Kubrick that he make a high-budget pornographic film called Blue Movie in an
attempt to take the genre and reinvent it. He decided not to do it, believing
that he did not have the temperament for pornographic cinema, nor did he think
he could successfully reinvent the genre enough to truly elevate it. Long
after Kubrick dropped the project, Terry Southern published a novel, also
entitled Blue Movie, about a highly regarded art film director named Boris
Adrian, who attempts just such a film. The novel was dedicated to Stanley
Kubrick. Southern started the novel while Kubrick was still considering this
idea, but the novel was not published until 1970, long after Kubrick lost
interest in the project.[58]

#### [edit] Perfume

Kubrick toyed with the idea of adapting Perfume by Patrick SÃ¼skind, a book he
greatly enjoyed; however, nothing came of it.[59] It was eventually adapted
for the screen by Tom Tykwer as Perfume: The Story of a Murderer.

## [edit] The Spy Who Loved Me

In 1976, Kubrick agreed to visit the recently completed 007 Stage at Pinewood
Studios to provide advice on how to light the enormous soundstage, which had
been built for and was being prepared for the James Bond movie The Spy Who
Loved Me. Kubrick agreed to consult when it was promised that nobody would
ever know of his involvement. This was honored until 2000, when the fact was
mentioned in the documentary on the making of The Spy Who Loved Me on the
special edition DVD of the 007 movie.

## [edit] Frequent collaborators

Unlike directors such as John Ford, Martin Scorsese, and Akira Kurosawa,
Kubrick did not generally reuse actors. However, Kubrick did on several
occasions work with the same actor more than once. In lead roles, there was
Sterling Hayden in both The Killing and Dr. Strangelove, Peter Sellers in
Lolita and Dr. Strangelove, and Kirk Douglas in Paths of Glory and Spartacus.
In supporting roles, Joe Turkel appears in The Killing, Paths of Glory, and
The Shining; Philip Stone appears in A Clockwork Orange, Barry Lyndon, and The
Shining; Leonard Rossiter is featured in 2001: A Space Odyssey and Barry
Lyndon; whilst Timothy Carey is in both The Killing and Paths of Glory. A
Clockwork Orange and Barry Lyndon saw the largest crossover, with six actors
(including Patrick Magee) having roles of various lengths in each film.

One of Kubrick's longest collaborations was with Leon Vitali, who, after
playing the older Lord Bullingdon in Barry Lyndon, became Kubrick's personal
assistant, working as the casting director on his following films, and
supervising film-to-video transfers for Kubrick.[60] He would also appear in
Eyes Wide Shut, playing the ominous Red Cloak, who confronts Tom Cruise during
the infamous orgy scene. Since Kubrick's death, Vitali has overseen the
restoration of both picture and sound elements for most of Kubrick's films. He
has also collaborated frequently with Eyes Wide Shut costar Todd Field on his
pictures.

## [edit] Family cameos

Stanley Kubrick's daughter Vivian has cameos in 2001: A Space Odyssey (as
Heywood Floyd's daughter), Barry Lyndon (as a girl at the birthday party for
young Bryan Lyndon), The Shining (as a party ghost), and Full Metal Jacket (as
a TV reporter). His stepdaughter Katherina has cameos in A Clockwork Orange
and Eyes Wide Shut, and her character's son in the latter is played by her
real son. Kubrick's wife Christiane Kubrick appeared prior to her marriage to
Kubrick in Paths of Glory, billed as Susanne Christian (her birth name is
Christiane Susanne Harlan), and as a cafe guest in Eyes Wide Shut.

## [edit] Later versions of source material for Kubrick films

Three of Stanley Kubrick's films have had their source material readapted in
some fashionâin two cases, with the source's author writing the new version,
hoping it will stand as the authorized adaptation in contrast to the Kubrick
version. In the third case, the source author's son gave his blessing to the
new version.

Anthony Burgess did a subsequent stage adaptation of A Clockwork Orange in
1990, which he hoped would be considered a more definitive adaptation than
Kubrick's film.[61] Stephen King wrote and produced a television miniseries of
The Shining, broadcast over three nights in 1997, that was motivated largely
by King's desire to see a more faithful adaptation of the book than that made
by Kubrick. Finally, Vladimir Nabokov's son, Dmitri, gave his blessing to the
Adrian Lyne film of Lolita while echoing his father's moderate misgivings
about Kubrick's version.[62][63] Both Burgess and King overtly stated that
they were annoyed by Kubrick's denying their lead character (Alex DeLarge and
Jack Torrance, respectively) a final redemption that was present in the source
material but absent from Kubrick's adaptation. This is arguably also a
difference between Kubrick's version of Lolita on the one hand and both the
novel and Lyne film on the other, though this was never mentioned by Dmitri
Nabokov.

It must be noted that among other Kubrick film adaptations of the work of
living authors, both Arthur C. Clarke and Gustav Hasford (author of the source
novel for Full Metal Jacket) were entirely satisfied with how Kubrick adapted
their work.

## [edit] Trademarks

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kubrick's cinematic style frequently features scenes with long parallel walls.

Stanley Kubrick's films have several trademark characteristics. All but his
first two full-length films and 2001 were adapted from existing novels (2001
being based on The Sentinel (short story) as well as having its' own planned
novelization), and he occasionally wrote screenplays in collaboration with
writers (usually novelists, but a journalist in the case of Full Metal Jacket)
who had limited screenwriting experience.[64] Many of his films had voiceover
narration, sometimes taken verbatim from the novel. With or without narration,
all of his films contain extensive character's-point-of-view footage. The
closing of films with "The End" went out of style with the advent of long
closing credits, but Kubrick continued to put it at the end of the credits,
long after the rest of the film industry stopped using it. On the other hand,
Kubrick occasionally dispensed with opening credits (in Space Odyssey and
Clockwork Orange) long before the industry started doing so commonly. His
credits are always a slide show. His only rolling credits are the opening
credits to The Shining.

Beginning with 2001: A Space Odyssey, all of his films except Full Metal
Jacket used mostly prerecorded classical music, in two cases electronically
altered by Wendy Carlos.[65] He also often used merry-sounding pop music in an
ironic way during scenes depicting devastation and destruction, especially in
the closing credits or end sequences of a film.[66]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Roger Ebert, among others, has noted the oft-recurring "Kubrick stare."

In his review of Full Metal Jacket, Roger Ebert[67] noted that many Kubrick
films have a facial closeup of a unraveling character in which the character's
head is tilted down and his eyes are tilted up. Kubrick also extensively
employed wide angle shots, character tracking shots, zoom shots, and shots
down tall parallel walls.

Many of Kubrick's films have back-references to previous Kubrick films. The
best-known examples of this are the appearance of the soundtrack album for
2001: A Space Odyssey appearing in the record store in A Clockwork Orange and
Quilty's joke about Spartacus in Lolita. Less obvious is the reference to a
painter named Ludovico in Barry Lyndon, Ludovico being the name of the
conditioning treatment in A Clockwork Orange.

All Stanley Kubrick movies have a scene in or just outside a bathroom.[68]
(Oddly, the most cited example of this in 2001 is Dr. Floyd's becoming stymied
by the Zero-Gravity Toilet en route to the moonânever David Bowman's
exploration [still wearing his spacesuit] of the bathroom adjacent to his
celestial bedroom after his journey through the Star Gate.)

Special case of CRM-114

<IMG>

<IMG>

The two actual cases of Kubrick's usage of CRM-114 and the CRM-114 amplifier
from the film Back to the Future.

Although Dr. Strangelove employs a device called CRM-114, and A Clockwork
Orange has a medicine called Serum 114, numerous and oft-repeated claims that
the numbers 114 appear in other Kubrick films are apocryphal. (CRM-114 is also
used in the source novel Red Alert, upon which Dr. Strangelove is based, which
should make anyone suspicious of claims that the numbers appeared in Kubrick's
earlier film The Killing.) Nonetheless, in a remarkable case of a director's
influencing popular culture through an exaggerated urban legend, there is in
honor of this Kubrick trademark, an e-mail spam filtering system, a
progressive rock band, a right-wing website, a sound amplifier in the film
Back to the Future, a catalog code in the TV series Heroes, and a weapon in
the TV series Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, all named CRM-114, and a short film
called Serum 114. The Star Trek: Deep Space Nine episode in question[69] had
as guest star actor Steven Berkoff from A Clockwork Orange and Barry Lyndon,
and it was directed by regular cast member Alexander Siddig, who is a nephew
of Malcolm MacDowell, star of A Clockwork Orange.

## [edit] Legacy

Kubrick made only thirteen feature films in his life. His oeuvre was
comparatively low in number, considering the output of his contemporaries such
as John Ford or Federico Fellini, due to his methodical and meticulous
dedication to every aspect of film production. A number of his films are
recognized as seminal classics within their genre.

2001: A Space Odyssey received numerous technical awards, including a BAFTA
award for cinematographer Geoffrey Unsworth and an Academy Award for best
visual effects, which Kubrick (as director of special effects on the film)
received. Five of his films were nominated for Academy Awards in various
categories, including Best Picture for Dr. Strangelove, A Clockwork Orange,
and Barry Lyndon, and Best Director for 2001: A Space Odyssey, Dr.
Strangelove, A Clockwork Orange, and Barry Lyndon.

Most awards for which Kubrick's films were nominated tended to be in the areas
of cinematography, art design, screenwriting, and music. However, only four of
his films were nominated for their acting performances, notably Lolita,
getting three acting nominations from the Golden Globes, and Peter Sellers
getting nominated for both an Oscar and a BAFTA for his triple roles in Doctor
Strangelove. Only Spartacus actually won an acting award. (See also Awards,
below.)

For Kubrick, written dialogue is one element to be put in balance with mise en
scÃ¨ne (set arrangements), music, and especially, editing. Inspired by
Pudovkin's treatise on film acting,[70] Kubrick realized that one could create
a performance in the editing room and often re-direct a film.

As he explained to a journalist,

> "Everything else [in film] comes from something else. Writing, of course, is
writing; acting comes from the theatre; and cinematography comes from
photography. Editing is unique to film. You can see something from different
points of view almost simultaneously, and it creates a new experience."[71]

Kubrick's method of operating thus became a quest for an emergent vision in
the editing room, when all the elements of a film could be assembled. The
price of this method, beginning as early as Spartacus (when he first had an
ample budget for film stock), was endless exploratory reshooting of scenes
that was an exhaustive investigation of all possible variations of a
scene.[72] This enabled him to walk into the editing room with copious
options. Jonathan Baxter has written:

> Instead of finding the intellectual spine of a film in the script before
starting work, Kubrick felt his way towards the final version of a film by
shooting each scene from many angles and demanding scores of takes on each
line. Then over months... he arranged and rearranged the tens of thousands of
scraps of film to fit a vision that really only began to emerge during
editing.[73]

Such notable contemporary directors as Martin Scorsese, Steven Spielberg, and
Ridley Scott have cited Kubrick as a source of inspiration, and in the case of
Spielberg, collaboration.[74] Kubrick's inventive and unique use of camera
movement and framing has often been repeated by other film directors, for
instance Jonathan Glazer, whose film Birth contains many visual references to
Kubrick.

Kubrick has been noted both for his social commentary and for his distinctive
visual style. At least two full-length books on Stanley Kubrick are devoted to
frame-by-frame analysis of his visual style: Stanley Kubrick, Director: A
Visual Analysis by Alexander Walker, and Stanley Kubrick: Visual Poet
1928â1999 (Basic Film) by Paul Duncan. History professor Geoffrey Cocks
notes that Kubrick has what he calls an "open narrative" style that "requires
the audience to derive meaning actively rather than being passively
instructed, entertained, and manipulated."[75] On the other hand, Cocks
believes that Kubrick's preoccupation with sweeping overarching historical
themes causes him to frequently sacrifice character development. "His films
consistently display a basic taxonomy of violence, systems of control, and
inherent human evil. This idÃ©e fixe freezes the people in his films into
types rather than fully developed characters."[76]

Two authors have noticed that the television cartoon The Simpsons abounds with
references to multiple Stanley Kubrick films, particularly 2001 and A
Clockwork Orange, but also Spartacus, Doctor Strangelove, and The Shining.
Gary Westfall, in The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy,
writes that while the references to "fantastic fiction" in The Simpsons are
copious, "there are two masters of the genre whose impact on The Simpsons
supersedes that of all others: Stanley Kubrick and Edgar Allan Poe."[77] John
Alberti, writing in Leaving Springfield: The Simpsons and the Possibility of
Oppositional Culture, writes of

> ...the show's almost obsessive references to the films of Stanley Kubrick...
It was almost as if the show's admittance of these films into the show's
pantheon of intertextual allusions finally marked their entry into the deepest
subconscious level of the global pop cultural mind.[78]

## [edit] Character

Kubrick infrequently discussed personal matters in interview, and rarely spoke
publicly at all. Over time, the gamut of his public image in the media ranged
from a reclusive genius to a megalomaniacal lunatic shut off from the
world.[79] Since his death, Kubrick's friends and family have publicly denied
both of these stereotypes. It is clear that the director left behind a strong
family and a circle of close friends, and many of those who worked for him
have spoken in his favor.

Kubrick's famous reclusive nature is largely a myth, and may have resulted
from his aversion to air travel. Despite once holding a pilot's license,
Kubrick had a fear of flying[80] and refused to take airplane trips. As a
result, he rarely left England in the last forty years of his life. In
addition, Kubrick shunned the Hollywood system and its publicity machine,[81]
resulting in little media coverage of him as a personality. Upon purchasing
the Childwickbury Manor in Hertfordshire, England, Kubrick set up his life so
that family and business were one.[82] He purchased top-of-the-line film
editing equipment and owned a number of cameras, which he sometimes used on
his own movies. Children and animals would frequently come in and out of the
room as he worked on a script or met with an actor. His appearance was not
well-known in his later years, to the extent that a British man named Alan
Conway successfully impersonated Kubrick in order to meet several well-known
actors and get into fancy clubs.[83] Conway is the subject of the film Colour
Me Kubrick (2005), written by Kubrick's assistant Anthony Frewin and directed
by Brian Cook, Kubrick's First Assistant Director for 25 years.

Despite his aversion to international travel, Kubrick was constantly in
contact with family members and business associates, often by telephone, and
contacted his collaborators at all hours of the day and night for
conversations that lasted from under a minute to several hours. Many of
Kubrick's admirers and friends spoke of these telephone conversations with
great affection and nostalgia after his death, especially Michael Herr and
Steven Spielberg. In his memoir of Kubrick, Herr stated that dozens of people
have claimed to have spoken to Kubrick on the day of his death and remarked
that "I believe all of them."[84] Kubrick also frequently invited people to
his house, ranging from actors to close friends, admired film directors,
writers, and intellectuals.

It was little-known by the public during Kubrick's life that he was also an
animal lover. He owned many dogs and cats, and showed an extraordinary
affection for them.[85] Kubrick's widow, Christiane, in her book version of
Stanley Kubrick: A Life In Pictures, wrote that Kubrick brought his cats onto
film sets and editing rooms with him in order to spend more time with them.
Matthew Modine remembers Kubrick's being deeply upset when a family of rabbits
was accidentally killed during the making of Full Metal Jacket. Kubrick was so
beside himself that he canceled shooting for the rest of the day. Philip
Kaplan, one of Kubrick's lawyers and friends, told the story that Stanley once
canceled, at the last moment, a meeting with him and another lawyer who had
flown to London from the United States because he had sat up all night with a
dying cat and was in no shape to participate. Also, according to Kaplan, the
huge kitchen table at Kubrick's home in St. Albans was supported by an
undulating base, and within each curved space was a dog, most of whom were of
no recognizable breed, and some not notably friendly to strangers.

Kubrick had a reputation for being tactless and rude to those he worked with.
Some of Kubrick's collaborators complained that his personality was cold and
that he lacked sympathy for the feelings of other people. Although Kubrick
became close friends with Clockwork Orange star Malcolm McDowell during
filming, Kubrick abruptly terminated the friendship soon after the film was
complete. McDowell was deeply hurt by this, and the schism between the two men
lasted until Kubrick's death.[86] Science fiction writer Brian Aldiss was
fired from Kubrick's never-completed project A.I. for vacationing with his
family in violation of his contract, even though Kubrick had put the project
on hold at the time. James Earl Jones, despite his admiration for Kubrick on
an artistic level, spoke negatively of his experience on Dr. Strangelove,
saying that Kubrick was disrespectful to actors, using them as instruments in
a grand design rather than allowing them to be creative artists in their own
right.[87] George C. Scott, who admired Kubrick in retrospect for reportedly
being one of the few people who could routinely beat him in chess, famously
resented Kubrick's using Scott's most over-the-top performances for the final
cut of Dr. Strangelove after being promised by Kubrick that they were warmups
and would not actually be in the movie.[88] Kubrick's employees and crew
members have stated that he was notorious for not complimenting anyone, and
rarely showed admiration for his coworkers for fear it would make them
complacent. Kubrick complimented them on their work only after the movie was
finished, unless he felt their work was "genius." The only actors that Kubrick
called "genius" were Peter Sellers, James Mason, and Malcolm McDowell.

Michael Herr, in his otherwise positive memoir of his friendship with Kubrick,
complained that Kubrick was extremely cheap and very greedy about money. He
stated that Kubrick was a "terrible man to do business with" and that the
director was upset until the day he died that Jack Nicholson made more money
from The Shining than he did.[89] Kirk Douglas often commented on Kubrick's
unwillingness to compromise, his out-of-control ego, and his ruthless
determination to make a film his own distinct work of art instead of a group
effort. However, Douglas has acknowledged that a large part of his dislike for
Kubrick was caused by the director's consistently negative statements about
Spartacus.

Many of those who worked with Kubrick have spoken kindly of him since his
death, including coworkers and friends Jack Nicholson, Diane Johnson, Tom
Cruise, Joe Turkel, Con Pederson, Carl Solomon, Ryan O'Neal, Anthony Frewin,
Ian Watson, John Milius, Jocelyn Pook, Sydney Pollack, R. Lee Ermey, and
others. Michael Herr's memoir of Kubrick, and Matthew Modine's book Full Metal
Jacket Diary show a much kinder, saner, and warmer version of Kubrick than the
conventional view of him as cold, demanding, and impersonal. In a series of
interviews found on the DVD of Eyes Wide Shut, a teary-eyed Tom Cruise
remembers Kubrick with great affection; Nicole Kidman shares his sentiments.
Shelley Winters, when asked what she thought of him, answered: "A gift."
Shelley Duvall, who played Wendy in The Shining, had a rocky relationship with
Kubrick, but said in retrospect that it was a great experience that made her
smarterâthough she'd never want to do it again. Malcolm McDowell
acknowledged in retrospect that some of his statements about Kubrick were
"unfair" and were a "cry out" to Kubrick to reconnect with him.

## [edit] Politics

In his memoir of Kubrick, Michael Herr, his friend and cowriter of the
screenplay for Full Metal Jacket, wrote:

> Stanley had views on everything, but I would not exactly call them
political... His views on democracy were those of most people I know, neither
left or right, not exactly brimming with belief, a noble failed experiment
along our evolutionary way, brought low by base instincts, money and self-
interest and stupidity... He thought the best system might be under a benign
despot, though he had little belief that such a man could be found. He wasn't
a cynic, but he could have easily passed for one. He was certainly a
capitalist. He believed himself to be a realist.

Herr recalls that Kubrick was sometimes akin to a 19th-century liberal-
humanist, that he found Irving Kristol's definition of a neoconservative as a
"liberal mugged by reality" to be hysterically funny, that he distrusted
almost all authority, and that he was a Social Darwinist.

Herr further wrote that Kubrick owned guns and did not think that war was an
entirely bad thing. In the documentary Stanley Kubrick: A Life in Pictures,
Herr says "â¦he also accepted that it was perfectly okay to acknowledge that,
of all the things war is, it's also very beautiful." The writer said of
initial reactions to Full Metal Jacket that "The political left will call
Kubrick a fascist."[90] In his 1987 interview with Gene Siskel, called
Candidly Kubrick, Kubrick said, "Full Metal Jacket suggests there is more to
say about war than it is just bad." He added that everything serious the drill
instructor says, such as "A rifle is only a tool, it is a hard heart that
kills," is completely true.

Though some have said Kubrick disliked America, Michael Herr says that America
was all he talked about and that he often thought of moving back. Herr wrote
that Kubrick was sent VHS tapes from American friends of NFL Football,
Seinfeld, The Simpsons, and other television shows that he could not get in
the United Kingdom. Kubrick told Siskel that he was not anti-American and
thought that America was a good country, though he did not think that Ronald
Reagan was a good President. According to Ian Watson, Kubrick said of the
pre-1997 socialist Labour Party that "If the Labourites ever get in, Iâll
leave the country." Watson claims that Kubrick was extremely opposed to taxes
on the rich and to welfare in general.[91]

Kubrick's earlier work can be seen as more liberal than his later work.
Colonel Dax in Paths of Glory, and Spartacus embody liberal ideals, and the
satire of government and military in Dr. Strangelove seems to point to a
liberal political perspective.[92] Kubrick's more mature works are more
pessimistic and suspicious of the so-called innate goodness of mankind, and
are critical of stances based on that positive assessment. For example, in A
Clockwork Orange, the police are as violent and vulgar as the droogs, and
Kubrick depicts both the subversive Leftist writer Mr. Alexander and the
authoritarian status quo Minister of the Interior as manipulative and
sinister.

Kubrick commented to the New York Times regarding A Clockwork Orange:

> Man isn't a noble savage, he's an ignoble savage. He is irrational, brutal,
weak, silly, unable to be objective about anything where his own interests are
involvedâthat about sums it up. I'm interested in the brutal and violent
nature of man because it's a true picture of him. And any attempt to create
social institutions on a false view of the nature of man is probably doomed to
failure.

He went on to say:

> The idea that social restraints are all bad is based on a utopian and
unrealistic vision of man. But in this movie, you have an example of social
institutions gone a bit berserk. Obviously, social institutions faced with the
law-and-order problem might choose to become grotesquely oppressive. The movie
poses two extremes: it shows Alex in his precivilized state, and society
committing a worse evil in attempting to cure him."

When New York Times writer Fred M. Hechinger wrote a piece that declared A
Clockwork Orange "fascist," Kubrick wrote a letter in response:

> It is quite true that my film's view of man is less flattering than the one
Rousseau entertained in a similarly allegorical narrativeâbut, in order to
avoid fascism, does one have to view man as a noble savage rather than an
ignoble one? Being a pessimist is not yet enough to qualify one to be regarded
as a tyrant (I hope)... The age of the alibi, in which we find ourselves,
began with the opening sentence of Rousseau's Emile: 'Nature made me happy and
good, and if I am otherwise, it is society's fault.' It is based on two
misconceptions: that man in his natural state was happy and good, and that
primal man had no society... Rousseau's romantic fallacy that it is society
which corrupts man, not man who corrupts society, places a flattering gauze
between ourselves and reality. This view, to use Mr. Hechinger's frame of
reference, is solid box office but, in the end, such a self-inflating illusion
leads to despair.

In his letter, Kubrick quoted extensively from Robert Ardrey, author of
African Genesis and The Social Contractânot to be confused with
Rousseau'sâand author Arthur Koestler, who is famous for writing The Ghost
In The Machine. Both authors (Koestler through psychology and Ardrey through
anthropology) searched for the cause of humanity's capacity for death and
destruction, and both, like Kubrick, were suspicious of the liberal belief in
the innate goodness of mankind. Ardrey and Kubrick both attribute this to
Rousseau, who, in Ardrey's words, "Fathered the romantic fallacy" and
Behaviourism, especially what they consider "radical Behaviourism," which they
blame primarily on B.F. Skinner. In his interview with The New York Times,
Kubrick stated that his view of man was closer to those of Christianity than
to humanism or Jewish theology, saying, "I mean, it's essentially Christian
theology anyway, that view of man."

Kubrick appeared to believe that freedom is still worth pursuing even if
mankind is ultimately ignoble, and that evil on the part of the
individualâhowever undesirableâis still preferable in contrast to the evil
of a totalitarian society. Kubrick said in an interview with Gene Siskel:

> To restrain man is not to redeem him... I think the danger is not that
authority will collapse, but that, finally, in order to preserve itself, it
will become very repressive... Law and order is not a phony issue, not just an
excuse for the Right to go further right.

## [edit] Religion

Stanley Kubrick was of Polish Jewish descent, but his family did not practice
religion at all[93]. Indeed though his father's real name was Jacob, he went
by Jacques or Jack as a move towards American assimilation.[94] When asked by
Michel Ciment in an interview if he had a religious upbringing, Kubrick
replied: "No, not at all."[95]

Kubrick is often said to have been an atheist. This may or may not be true. In
Kubrick's interview with Craig McGregor, he said:[96]

> 2001 would give a little insight into my metaphysical interests", he
explains. "I'd be very surprised if the universe wasn't full of an
intelligence of an order that to us would seem God-like. I find it very
exciting to have a semi-logical belief that there's a great deal to the
universe we don't understand, and that there is an intelligence of an
incredible magnitude outside the Earth. It's something I've become more and
more interested in. I find it a very exciting and satisfying hope.

When asked by Eric Nordern in Kubrick's interview with Playboy if 2001: A
Space Odyssey was a religious film, Kubrick elaborated:[97]

> I will say that the God concept is at the heart of 2001 but not any
traditional, anthropomorphic image of God. I don't believe in any of Earth's
monotheistic religions, but I do believe that one can construct an intriguing
scientific definition of God, once you accept the fact that there are
approximately 100 billion stars in our galaxy alone, that each star is a life-
giving sun and that there are approximately 100 billion galaxies in just the
visible universe. Given a planet in a stable orbit, not too hot and not too
cold, and given a few billion years of chance chemical reactions created by
the interaction of a sun's energy on the planet's chemicals, it's fairly
certain that life in one form or another will eventually emerge. It's
reasonable to assume that there must be, in fact, countless billions of such
planets where biological life has arisen, and the odds of some proportion of
such life developing intelligence are high. Now, the sun is by no means an old
star, and its planets are mere children in cosmic age, so it seems likely that
there are billions of planets in the universe not only where intelligent life
is on a lower scale than man but other billions where it is approximately
equal and others still where it is hundreds of thousands of millions of years
in advance of us. When you think of the giant technological strides that man
has made in a few millenniaâless than a microsecond in the chronology of the
universeâcan you imagine the evolutionary development that much older life
forms have taken? They may have progressed from biological species, which are
fragile shells for the mind at best, into immortal machine entitiesâand
then, over innumerable eons, they could emerge from the chrysalis of matter
transformed into beings of pure energy and spirit. Their potentialities would
be limitless and their intelligence ungraspable by humans.

In the same interview, he also blames the poor critical reaction to 2001 as
follows:[97]

> Perhaps there is a certain element of the lumpen literati that is so
dogmatically atheist and materialist and Earth-bound that it finds the
grandeur of space and the myriad mysteries of cosmic intelligence anathema.

In an interview with William Kloman of The New York Times, when asked why
there is hardly any dialogue in 2001, Kubrick explained:

> I don't have the slightest doubt that to tell a story like this, you
couldn't do it with words. There are only 46 minutes of dialogue scenes in the
film, and 113 of non-dialogue. There are certain areas of feeling and
realityâor unreality or innermost yearning, whatever you want to call
itâwhich are notably inaccessible to words. Music can get into these areas.
Painting can get into them. Non-verbal forms of expression can. But words are
a terrible straitjacket. It's interesting how many prisoners of that
straitjacket resent its being loosened or taken off. There's a side to the
human personality that somehow senses that wherever the cosmic truth may lie,
it doesn't lie in A, B, C, D. It lies somewhere in the mysterious, unknowable
aspects of thought and life and experience. Man has always responded to it.
Religion, mythology, allegoriesâit's always been one of the most responsive
chords in man. With rationalism, modern man has tried to eliminate it, and
successfully dealt some pretty jarring blows to religion. In a sense, what's
happening now in films and in popular music is a reaction to the stifling
limitations of rationalism. One wants to break out of the clearly arguable,
demonstrable things which really are not very meaningful, or very useful or
inspiring, nor does one even sense any enormous truth in them.

Stephen King recalled Kubrick calling him late at night while he was filming
The Shining and Kubrick asked him, "Do you believe in God?" King said that he
had answered, "Yes", but has had three different versions of what happened
next. One time, he said that Kubrick simply hung up on him. On other
occasions, he claimed Kubrick said, "I knew it", and then hung up on him. On
yet another occasion, King claimed that Kubrick said, before hanging up, "No,
I don't think there is a God." In more recent interviews, King has had yet
another version of the "God" story, in which Kubrick calls King and asks him
if he thinks ghost stories are optimistic because they all suggest there is
life after death. King replies, "What about hell?" There is a pause and
Kubrick says, "I do not believe in hell."

Finally, Katharina Kubrick Hobbs was asked by alt.movies.kubrick if Stanley
Kubrick believed in God. Here is her response:[98]

> Hmm, tricky. I think he believed in something, if you understand my meaning.
He was a bit of a fatalist actually, but he was also very superstitious. Truly
a mixture of nature and nurture. I don't know exactly what he believed, he
probably would have said that no-one can really ever know for sure, and that
it would be rather arrogant to assume that one could know. I asked him once
after The Shining, if he believed in ghosts. He said that it would be nice if
there "were" ghosts, as that would imply that there is something after death.
In fact, I think he said, "Gee I hope so."...He did not have a religious
funeral service. He's not buried in consecrated ground. We always celebrated
Christmas and had huge Christmas trees.

In Stanley Kubrick: A Life in Pictures, Jack Nicholson recalls that Kubrick
said The Shining is an overall optimistic story because "anything that says
there's anything after death is ultimately an optimistic story."

## [edit] Aspect ratio

<IMG>

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2008)  
There has been a longstanding debate regarding the DVD releases of Kubrick's
films; specifically, the aspect ratio of many of the films. The primary point
of contention relates to his final five films: A Clockwork Orange, Barry
Lyndon, The Shining, Full Metal Jacket, and Eyes Wide Shut.

Kubrick's initial involvement with home video mastering of his films was a
result of television screenings of 2001: A Space Odyssey.[99] Because the film
was shot in 65 mm, the composition of each shot was compromised by the pan-
and-scan method of transferring a wide-screen image to fit a 1.33:1 television
set.

Kubrick's final five films were shot "flat"âthe full 1.37:1 area is exposed
in the camera and cropped in a theater's projector to the 1.85:1 ratio.

The first mastering of these five films was in 2000 as part of the "Stanley
Kubrick Collection," consisting of Lolita, Dr. Strangelove (in association
with Sony Pictures), 2001: A Space Odyssey, A Clockwork Orange, Barry Lyndon,
The Shining, Full Metal Jacket, and Eyes Wide Shut. Kubrick oversaw the video
masters in 1989 for Warner Home Video, and approved of 1.33:1 transfers for
all of the films except for 2001, which was letterboxed[citation needed].

Kubrick never approved a 1.85:1 video transfer of any of his films; when he
died in 1999, DVDs and the 16Ã9 format were only beginning to catch on
strongly in the U.S., and most people were still used to seeing movies fill
their television screen.[100] Warner Home Video chose to release these films
with the transfers that Kubrick had explicitly approved.[101]

In 2007, Warner Home Video remastered 2001: A Space Odyssey, A Clockwork
Orange, The Shining, Full Metal Jacket, and Eyes Wide Shut in High-Definition,
releasing the titles on DVD, HD DVD, and Blu-ray Disc. All were released in
16Ã9 anamorphic transfers, preserving the theatrical 1.85:1 aspect ratios for
all of the flat films except A Clockwork Orange, which was transferred at an
aspect ratio of 1.66:1.[102]

In regards to the Warner Bros. titles, there is little studio documentation
that is public about them other than instructions given to projectionists on
initial release; however, Kubrick's storyboards for The Shining do prove that
he composed the film for wide-screen. In instructions given to photographer
John Alcott in one panel, Kubrick writes:

    THE FRAME IS EXACTLY 1.85-1. Obviously you compose for that but protect the full 1.33-1 area.[103]
More confusion results in regards to Kubrick's non-Warner distributed titles.
During the days of laserdisc, The Criterion Collection released six Kubrick
films. Spartacus and 2001 were both native 70 mm releases (exhibited in their
roadshow engagements at a ratio of 2.20:1) at the same ratio as their
subsequent DVD releases, and The Killing and Paths of Glory were both
transferred at 1.33:1, despite the latter being hard matted extensively. Both
pictures were theatrically projected at an aspect ratio of 1.85:1.[104][105]

Dr. Strangelove and Lolita were also transferred at 1.33:1, although
Strangelove exhibits a number of hard mattes at a ratio of 1.66:1 in second-
unit footage. This is sometimes falsely attributed to the use of stock footage
in Strangelove. Both films were presented theatrically at ratios of
1.85:1.[106][107]

The DVD versions of The Killing and Paths of Glory released by MGM Home
Entertainment retained the same 1.33:1 aspect ratio as the laserdisc versions.
The initial DVD releases of Strangelove maintained the 1.33:1, Kubrick-
approved transfer, but for the most recent two-disc special edition, Sony
Pictures Home Entertainment replaced it with a new, digitally remastered
anamorphic transfer with an aspect ratio of 1.66:1. All DVD releases of Lolita
to date have been at a uniform 1.66:1 aspect ratio, and the expectation is
that future releases will retain this aspect ratio.

Also of note, laserdisc releases of 2001 were in a slightly flawed aspect
ratio. The film was shot in 65 mm, which has a ratio of 2.20:1, but many
theaters could only show it in 35 mm reduction prints, which were presented at
a ratio of 2.35:1. Thus, the picture was slightly modified for the 35 mm
prints. The laserdisc releases maintained the 2.20:1 ratio, but the source
material was an already cropped 35 mm print; thus, the edges were slightly
cropped and the top and bottom of the image slightly opened up. This seems to
have finally been corrected with the most recent DVD release, which was newly
remastered from a 70 mm print.

In debates over Kubrick's original intent, he is frequently quoted as saying
that he likes/prefers height to width[citation needed]. However, without
context, it is unclear whether he made this statement regarding flat wide-
screen versus the Academy ratio or anamorphic wide-screen vs. flat wide-
screen. The latter would certainly be possible, given that many filmmakers
contemporary to Kubrick used anamorphic 35 mm as a default aspect ratio,
whereas Kubrick never used it. The closest he came was Spartacus (shot in
Super Technirama 70), and 2001: A Space Odyssey (shot in Super Panavision 70).

## [edit] Filmography

Documentary short films

  * Day of the Fight (1951)
  * Flying Padre (1951)
  * The Seafarers (1953)

Feature films

Year Title Awards  
1953 Fear and Desire  
1955 Killer's Kiss  
1956 The Killing Nominated for BAFTA Award: Best Film from Any Source  
1957 Paths of Glory Nominated for BAFTA Award: Best Film from Any Source  
1960 Spartacus Nominated for 6 Oscars, Won 4: Best Supporting Actor, Best Art
Direction, Best Cinematography, Best Costume Design, Best Editing, Best
Original Score  
Nominated for 6 Golden Globes, Won 1: Best Drama Picture, Best Drama Actor,
Best Director, Best Original Score, Best Supporting Actor  
Nominated for BAFTA Award: Best Film from Any Source  
1962 Lolita Nominated for Oscar: Best Adapted Screenplay  
Nominated for 5 Golden Globes, Won 1: Most Promising Newcomer â Female, Best
Drama Actor, Best Drama Actress, Best Director, Best Supporting Actor  
Nominated for BAFTA Award: Best Actor  
1964 Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb
Nominated for 4 Oscars:Best Actor, Best Director, Best Picture, Best Adapted
Screenplay  
Nominated for 6 BAFTA Awards, Won 3: Best British Art Direction, Best British
Film, Best Film from any Source, Best British Actor, Best British Screenplay,
Best Foreign Actor  
1968 2001: A Space Odyssey Nominated for 4 Oscars, Won 1 : Best Special
Effects, Best Director, Best Art Direction, Best Original Screenplay  
Nominated for 4 BAFTA Awards, Won 3: Best Art Direction, Best Cinematography,
Best Sound Track, Best Film  
1971 A Clockwork Orange Nominated for 4 Oscars: Best Director, Best Editing,
Best Picture, Best Adapted Screenplay  
Nominated for 3 Golden Globes: Best Director, Best Drama Picture, Best Drama
Actor  
Nominated for 7 BAFTA Awards: Best Art Direction, Best Cinematography, Best
Direction, Best Film, Best Film Editing, Best Screenplay, Best Sound Track  
1975 Barry Lyndon Nominated for 7 Oscars, Won 4: Best Art Direction, Best
Cinematography, Best Costume Design, Best Original Song Score and/or
Adaptation, Best Director, Best Picture, Best Adapted Screenplay  
Nominated for 2 Golden Globes: Best Director, Best Drama Picture  
Nominated for 5 BAFTA Awards, Won 2: Best Cinematography, Best Direction, Best
Art Direction, Best Costume Design, Best Film  
1980 The Shining  
1987 Full Metal Jacket Nominated for Oscar: Best Adapted Screenplay  
Nominated for Golden Globe: Best Supporting Actor  
Nominated for 2 BAFTA Awards: Best Sound, Best Special Effects  
1999 Eyes Wide Shut Nominated for Golden Globe: Best Original Score  
This chart is limited to the Oscars, Golden Globes, and BAFTAs.

Kubrick has also been nominated for and won awards from various societies of
film critics, film festivals, and both the Writers Guild of America and the
Directors Guild of America.

In the science fiction world, Kubrick has three times won the especially
coveted Hugo Award, a prized mainly for print writing and only secondarily for
drama production. He also received four nominations (with one win) of the sci-
fi-film-oriented Saturn awards from the Academy of Science Fiction for The
Shining, an award that did not exist when Kubrick won his three Hugos.

The least honored of Kubrick's films since 1956's The Killing is 1980's The
Shining, which garnered only the above-mentioned four nominations (with one
win) for Saturn awards. In addition, The Shining is the only Stanley Kubrick
film ever to be nominated for any of the notorious Razzies for worst film
element. It was nominated for two.

## [edit] See also

  * Stanley Kubrick Archive at University of the Arts London Archives and Special Collections Centre.

## [edit] References

### [edit] Notes

  1. ^ The official Stanley Kubrick Exhibition site only mentions his father's Austro-Romanian origin. Several other sources say his two parents were of "Austro-Romanian and Polish origin"
  2. ^ a b c d Stanley Kubrick: A Biography By Vincent Lobrutto - Page 524ISBN 9780306809064
  3. ^ The Making of 2001, a Space Odyssey: A Space Odyssey - Page 70ISBN 9780375755286
  4. ^ Stanley Kubrick: A Biography - Page 32ISBN 9780786704859
  5. ^ Stanley Kubrick By Paul Duncan; - Page 25; 46; 62 ISBN 9783822815922
  6. ^ 100 Famous People at the Turning Point in Their Lives - Page 84 ISBN 9780740758102
  7. ^ Students on the Right Way By Holger Thuss - Page 110 ISBN 9783831141296
  8. ^ Stanley Kubrick: A Biography - Page 56 ISBN 9780786704859
  9. ^ Stanley Kubrick:Interviews - Page 190
  10. ^ Major Film Directors of the American and British Cinema - Page 127 ISBN 9780934223591]
  11. ^ Stanley Kubrick By John Baxter ISBN 9780786704859
  12. ^ [1]
  13. ^ Cinema, A Critical Dictionary, the Major Film-makers - Page 562 ISBN 9780670222575
  14. ^ The Scribner Encyclopedia of American Lives ISBN 9780684806631
  15. ^ Kubrick: Inside a Film Artist's Maze - Page 260 ISBN 9780253213907
  16. ^ For a recent example see David Denby in The New Yorker [2]
  17. ^ Steven Spielberg Interviews - Page 82 ISBN 9781578061136
  18. ^ [3]
  19. ^ Stanley Kubrick By Vincent Lobrutto - Page 164 ISBN 9780306809064
  20. ^ Heartbreak and Vine The Fate of Hardboiled Writers in Hollywood - Page 125 ISBN 9781852426781
  21. ^ Screening the Male: Exploring Masculinities in Hollywood Cinema - Page 170 ISBN 9780415077590
  22. ^ The Philosophy of Stanley Kubrick - Page 170 ISBN 9780813124452
  23. ^ Now Dig This By Terry Southern - Page 74 ISBN 9780802138941
  24. ^ What They Say About Stanley Kubrick, The New York Times, July 4, 1999
  25. ^ Mireia Aragay. page 113. Books in motion: adaptation, intertextuality, authorship. Rodopi, 2005. ISBN 9789042019577
  26. ^ Stanley Kubrick, a Guide to References and Resources By Wallace Coyle
  27. ^ Stanley Kubrick: Visual Poet 1928-1999 - Page 80 ISBN 9783822815922
  28. ^ See Stanley Kubrick: A Biography by Vincent Lobrutto p. 225. This remark was originally in a 1972 interview with Newsweek magazine.
  29. ^ Macmillan International Dictionary of Films and Filmmakers, vol. 1, p. 126
  30. ^ See Stanley Kubrick by Vincent LoBrutto p. 205
  31. ^ "2001: A Space Odyssey - Alex North's unused Soundtrack". mfiles.co.uk. http://www.mfiles.co.uk/reviews/alex-norths-2001-a-space-odyssey.htm. Retrieved on 2007-12-24.
  32. ^ [4]
  33. ^ "What did Kubrick say is the plot of 2001?". http://www.krusch.com/kubrick/Q13.html.
  34. ^ See The A List: The National Society Of Film Critics' 100 Essential Films by Jay Carr, National Society of Film Critics p. 1
  35. ^ Interview with Michael Ciment [5]
  36. ^ [6]
  37. ^ http://www.visual-memory.co.uk/amk/doc/0051.html
  38. ^ [7]
  39. ^ See Steven Spielberg Interviews by Steven Spielberg, Lester D. Friedman, Brent Notbohm p. 36
  40. ^ [8]
  41. ^ [9]
  42. ^ [10]
  43. ^ CNN reports that US magazine said this. See [11]
  44. ^ Stephen Holden (March 8, 1999). "Stanley Kubrick, Film Director With a Bleak Vision, Dies at 70". New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9D01EFDF103FF93BA35750C0A96F958260. Retrieved on 2007-07-21.
  45. ^ Stanley Kubric by Vincent LoBrutto p. 164
  46. ^ [12]
  47. ^ Geoffrey Cocks The Wolf at the Door: Stanley Kubrick, History and the Holocaust p. 151
  48. ^ Cocks p. 149
  49. ^ "New "Kubrick Film" To Be Made". http://imdb.com/news/sb/2006-10-31/#4.
  50. ^ "The Untitled Dead Pool Column". http://www.tnmc.org/dp/0122031.shtml.
  51. ^ See New York Times biography for Kubrick http://movies.nytimes.com/person/98221/Stanley-Kubrick/biography
  52. ^ See interview with Kubrick http://www.visual-memory.co.uk/amk/doc/interview.aco.html
  53. ^ A full article on the production is in Salon.com at [13]
  54. ^ See Depth of Field by Geoffrey Cocks, James Diedrick, Glenn Wesley Perusek p. 196. See also Cock's "The Wolf at the Door: Stanley Kubrick, History and the Holocaust"
  55. ^ "Caldwell on The wolf at the door". Latrobe.edu.au. http://www.latrobe.edu.au/screeningthepast/19/wolf-door-kubrick.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-25.
  56. ^ Joan Dupont "Kubrick Speaks, Through Family's Documentary", International Herald Tribune, September 15, 2001. Retrieved on May 8, 2008.
  57. ^ See provile of Eco entitled "The Armani of Literature" at http://www.theage.com.au/news/books/bliteratureb-umberto-eco-the-armani-of-literature/2007/12/13/1197135651584.html
  58. ^ Baxter, John. Kubrick: A Biography. New York: Carroll & Graf, 1997. Pgs 194-195.
  59. ^ Baxter, John. Kubrick: A Biography. New York: Carroll & Graf, 1997. Pgs 332, 360.
  60. ^ A full discussion of their collaboration is at [14]
  61. ^ "Anthony Burgess from A Clockwork Orange: A play with music (Century Hutchinson Ltd, 1987)". Home.wlv.ac.uk. http://home.wlv.ac.uk/~fa1871/burgess.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-25.
  62. ^ Nabokov Won't Be Nailed Down, The New York Times, April 21, 2001
  63. ^ "NABOKV-L Archives - September 1999 (#63)". Listserv.ucsb.edu. http://listserv.ucsb.edu/lsv-cgi-bin/wa?A2=ind9909&L=nabokv-l&P=8171. Retrieved on 2008-10-25.
  64. ^ Terry Southern for Doctor Strangelove, Arthur C. Clarke for 2001, and Diane Johnson for The Shining
  65. ^ A Clockwork Orange and The Shining. CO's Walter Carlos and Shining's Wendy Carlos are one and the same.
  66. ^ The closing scenes or credits of Doctor Strangelove, A Clockwork Orange, The Shining, and Full Metal Jacket all employ jolly music in an ironic way in their closing credits or final scenes. However, although the closing scenes of Jacket have the soldiers singing the Mickey Mouse song, the closing credits use the Rolling Stones song Paint it Black
  67. ^ "Full Metal Jacket :: rogerebert.com :: Reviews". Rogerebert.suntimes.com. http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/19870626/REVIEWS/706260302/1023. Retrieved on 2008-10-25.
  68. ^ "Stanley Kubrick: An Indoor-Plumbing Luddite by Stephanie Morgan, Columbus Wired Columnist". Columbuswired.net. http://www.columbuswired.net/Columns/Morgan/Kubrick_093002.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-25.
  69. ^ "Business as Usual"
  70. ^ See Stanley Kubrick: Interviews (Conversations with Filmmakers) by Gene Phillips p. 199
  71. ^ Stanley Kubrick: A biography by John Baxter p. 40
  72. ^ For discussion of Kubrick's method of multiple takes see Stanley Kubrick: A biography by Vincent Vincent LoBrutto p. 394-396, 446, 349, 440-446, 423-31.
  73. ^ Stanley Kubrick: A biography by John Baxter p. 40
  74. ^ Scorsese and Spielberg are interviewed in the film Stanley Kubrick a Life in Pictures. Ridley Scott has discussed Kubrick's influence on him in an interview in Wired magazine.http://www.wired.com/entertainment/hollywood/magazine/15-10/ff_bladerunner?currentPage=all
  75. ^ The Wolf at the Door: Stanley Kubrick, History and the Holocaust by Geoffrey Cocks p. 6
  76. ^ Cocks, p. 11
  77. ^ p. 1232 of book cited
  78. ^ p. 277 of book cited
  79. ^ Kubrick's script collaborator on Eyes Wide Shut portrayed him as such in an article in The New Yorker. See interview with Tom Cruise at http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/19990715/PEOPLE/77010329
  80. ^ See Stanley Kubrick: Essays on his Films and Legacy by Gary Don Rhodes p. 17
  81. ^ See L.A. Noir: Nine Dark Visions of the City of Angels by p. 166
  82. ^ See Stanley Kubrick Companion p. 16 by James Howard
  83. ^ See http://film.guardian.co.uk/Feature_Story/Observer/0,,30123,00.html
  84. ^ Kubrick by Michael Herr p. 4
  85. ^ See Stanley Kubrick: A Biography" by John Baxter p. 31
  86. ^ McDowell discusses this in the documentary Stanley Kubrick: A Life in Pictures"
  87. ^ See article by Jones in Leisure and Arts http://www.opinionjournal.com/la/?id=110005898
  88. ^ See Kubrick by Michael Herr p. 60 and Jones article.
  89. ^ Kubrick by Michael Herr p. 19
  90. ^ Lloyd Rose (June 28, 1987). "Stanley Kubrick, at a Distance". http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/movies/features/kubrick1987.htm.
  91. ^ Ian Watson (2000). "Plumbing Stanley Kubrick". The New York Review of Science Fiction. http://www.ianwatson.info/kubrick.htm.
  92. ^ This was the perception of Pauline Kael as well as author Norman Kagan writing in The Cinema of Stanley Kubrick. See p. 65 and 134.
  93. ^ Geoffrey Cocks The Wolf at the Door: Stanley Kubrick, History and the Holocaust p. 23
  94. ^ Cocks ibid p. 23
  95. ^ "Kubrick on The Shining - An interview with Michel Ciment". http://www.visual-memory.co.uk/amk/doc/interview.ts.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-24.
  96. ^ "The Hechinger Debacle". http://www.visual-memory.co.uk/amk/doc/0037.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-24.
  97. ^ a b "What did Kubrick have to say about what 2001 "means"?". http://www.krusch.com/kubrick/Q12.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-24.
  98. ^ Katharina Kubrick Hobbs (2000-07-14). "Re: Questions for KCKH". alt.movies.kubrick. (Web link).
  99. ^ Stanley Kubrick: A Biography, p252, "Kubrick had also been appalled by the excesses of TV presentation, and the pan-and-scan technique..."
  100. ^ [15]. In July 2007, less than 10% of US households had HDTV (16Ã9 ready) sets.
  101. ^ (August 29, 2000). The Stanley Kubrick Collection [DVD]. Warner Home Video. ISBN 6305440093.
  102. ^ (January 22, 2008). Stanley Kubrick - Warner Home Video Directors Series [DVD]. Warner Home Video. ISBN B000UJCAKO.
  103. ^ Storyboard for The Shining. Castle, Alison (editor) and Kubrick, Stanley (photographs) (2005). The Stanley Kubrick Archives. Taschen. ISBN 3-8228-2284-1. Page 452.
  104. ^ May 26, 1956 "Feature Reviews: The Killing". BoxOffice Magazine, Page 1975.
  105. ^ November 23, 1957 "Feature Reviews: Paths of Glory." BoxOffice Magazine, Page 2165.
  106. ^ June 25, 1962 "Feature Reviews: Lolita." BoxOffice Magazine, Page 2641.
  107. ^ February 3, 1964 "Feature Reviews: Dr. Strangelove". BoxOffice Magazine, Page 2797.

### [edit] Further reading

  * Bernstein, Jeremy (November 1966). "A Day in the Life of Stanley Kubrick". The New Yorker.
  * Castle, Alison (editor) and Kubrick, Stanley (photographs) (2005). The Stanley Kubrick Archives. Taschen. ISBN 3-8228-2284-1.
  * Crone, Rainer (text) and Stanley Kubrick (photographs) (2005). Drama and Shadows: Photographs 1945-1950. Phaidon Press. ISBN 0-7148-4438-1.
  * Hughes, David (2000). The Complete Kubrick. London: Virgin. ISBN 0-7535-0452-9.
  * Kubrick, Stanley (2001). Stanley Kubrick: Interviews. University Press of Mississippi. ISBN 1-57806-297-7.
  * Lubrutto, Vincent (1999). Stanley Kubrick: A Biography. Da Capo Press. ISBN 0306809060.
  * Lyons, V and Fitzgerald, M. (2005) ââAsperger syndrome : a gift or a curse?ââ New York : Nova Science Publishers. ISBN 1-59454-387-9
  * Nelson, Thomas Allen (1982). Kubrick: Inside a Film Artist's Maze. Indiana University Press. ISBN 0253213908.
  * Rasmussen, Randy (2005). Stanley Kubrick: Seven Films Analyzed. McFarland. ISBN 0786421525, 9780786421527.
  * Baxter, John (1997). Stanley Kubrick: A Biography. Basic Books. ISBN 0786704853.

  * Deutsches Filmmuseum (Ed.): Stanley Kubrick ; Kinematograph Nr. 14, Frankfurt/Main, 2004. ISBN 3-88799-069-2 (English edition)

### [edit] Documentary

  * Stanley Kubrick: A Life in Pictures. Documentary film. Dir. Jan Harlan. Warner Home Video, 2001. 142 min.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Stanley
Kubrick  
  * Stanley Kubrick at the Internet Movie Database
  * Stanley Kubrick: The Master Filmmaker
  * Senses of Cinema: Great Directors Critical Database
  * Stanley Kubrick biography and credits at the British Film Institute's Screenonline
  * Works by or about Stanley Kubrick in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
  * Stanley Kubrick Archive at the London College of Communication
  * The Authorized Stanley Kubrick Web Site by Warner Bros.
  * The Kubrick Site
  * Kubrick Multimedia Film Guide
  * Kubrick on Senses of Cinema (In Depth Biography)
  * Multi-media Kubrick archive
  * The Guardian: Citizen Kubrick
  * List of interviews and Look photographs
  * List of all the published Look photographs
  * http://www.krusch.com/kubrick/Q13.html
  * http://www.visual-memory.co.uk/amk/doc/0037.html
  * Kubrick on The Shining, An interview with Michel Ciment
  * The Hechinger Debacle
  * Stanley Kubrick Interviews, by Stanley Kubrick, Gene D. Phillips
  * Stanley Kubrick at the TCM Movie Database
  * Stanley Kubrick at Find A Grave

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Films directed by Stanley Kubrick  
Short films

Day of the Fight (1951) â¢ Flying Padre (1951) â¢ The Seafarers (1953)  
1950s

Fear and Desire (1953) â¢ Killer's Kiss (1955) â¢ The Killing (1956) â¢
Paths of Glory (1957)  
1960s

Spartacus (1960) â¢ Lolita (1962) â¢ Dr. Strangelove (1964) â¢ 2001: A
Space Odyssey (1968)  
1970s

A Clockwork Orange (1971) â¢ Barry Lyndon (1975)  
1980s

The Shining (1980) â¢ Full Metal Jacket (1987)  
1990s

Eyes Wide Shut (1999)  
Related articles

World Assembly of Youth â¢ A.I. Artificial Intelligence (2001) â¢ Stanley
Kubrick: A Life in Pictures (2001) â¢ Colour Me Kubrick (2006) â¢ Stanley
Kubrick's Boxes (2008)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

The Space Odyssey series  
Films

2001: A Space Odyssey (1968) Â· 2010 (1984)  
Books

2001: A Space Odyssey (1968) Â· 2010: Odyssey Two (1982) Â· 2061: Odyssey
Three (1987) Â· 3001: The Final Odyssey (1997) Â· The Lost Worlds of 2001
(1972)  
Comics

2001: A Space Odyssey (1976)  
Short stories

"The Sentinel" (written 1948, first published 1951 as "Sentinel of Eternity")
Â· "Encounter in the Dawn" (first published 1953)  
Characters

HAL 9000 Â· David Bowman Â· Dr. Chandra Â· Walter Curnow Â· Heywood Floyd Â·
Frank Poole  
Vehicles

Discovery One Â· List of spacecraft  
Locations

Earth Â· Moon Â· Clavius Base Â· Tycho Â· Jupiter Â· Europa Â· Io Â· Ganymede
Â· Ganymede City Â· Saturn Â· Iapetus Â· Beyond the Infinite  
Cast

Keir Dullea Â· John Lithgow Â· Gary Lockwood Â· Helen Mirren Â· Douglas Rain
Â· Roy Scheider Â· William Sylvester Â· Leonard Rossiter Â· Margaret Tyzack  
Crew/creators

Arthur C. Clarke Â· Peter Hyams Â· Jack Kirby Â· Stanley Kubrick  
Related articles

Interpretations of 2001: A Space Odyssey Â· 2001: A Space Odyssey score Â·
Monoliths Â· Poole - HAL 9000  
Persondata  
NAME Kubrick, Stanley  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION American film director  
DATE OF BIRTH July 26, 1928  
PLACE OF BIRTH Manhattan, New York City, United States  
DATE OF DEATH March 7, 1999  
PLACE OF DEATH Harpenden, Hertfordshire, England, U.K.  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanley_Kubrick"

Categories: 1928 births | 1999 deaths | American agnostics | American
expatriates in the United Kingdom | American film directors | American film
producers | American immigrants to the United Kingdom | American screenwriters
| BAFTA winners (people) | Best Visual Effects Academy Award winners |
Censorship in the arts | City College of New York alumni | Deaths from
myocardial infarction | Jewish American film directors | Jewish agnostics |
People from the Bronx

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles needing additional
references from November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since
January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kiswahili
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Occitan
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sardu
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * VolapÃ¼k
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 22:28.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



