
# Triumph of the Will

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Triumph of the Will  
<IMG>  
1935 German theatrical program  
Directed by Leni Riefenstahl  
Produced by Leni Riefenstahl  
Written by Leni Riefenstahl  
Walter Ruttmann  
Starring Adolf Hitler  
Hermann GÃ¶ring  
Other Nazi Leaders  
Music by Herbert Windt  
Richard Wagner  
Editing by Leni Riefenstahl  
Studio Reichsparteitag-Film  
Distributed by Universum Film AG  
Release date(s) 28 March 1935  
(Berlin, Germany)  
Running time 114 minutes  
Country Germany  
Language German  
Preceded by Victory of Faith  
Triumph of the Will (German: Triumph des Willens) is a propaganda film made by
Leni Riefenstahl. It chronicles the 1934 Nazi Party Congress in Nuremberg. The
film contains excerpts from speeches given by various Nazi leaders at the
Congress, including portions of speeches by Adolf Hitler, interspersed with
footage of massed party members. Hitler commissioned the film and served as an
unofficial executive producer; his name appears in the opening titles. The
overriding theme of the film is the return of Germany as a great power, with
Hitler as the True German Leader who will bring glory to the nation.

Triumph of the Will was released in 1935 and rapidly became one of the better-
known examples of propaganda in film history. Riefenstahl's techniques, such
as moving cameras, the use of telephoto lenses to create a distorted
perspective, aerial photography, and revolutionary approach to the use of
music and cinematography, have earned Triumph recognition as one of the
greatest films in history. Riefenstahl won several awards, not only in Germany
but also in the United States, France, Sweden, and other countries. The film
was popular in the Third Reich[1] and elsewhere, and has continued to
influence movies, documentaries, and commercials to this day.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Synopsis
  * 2 Origins
  * 3 Filmmaking
  * 4 Themes
    * 4.1 Religion
    * 4.2 Power
    * 4.3 Unity
  * 5 Hitler's speeches
  * 6 Response
  * 7 Controversy
    * 7.1 Wehrmacht objections
  * 8 Influences and legacy
  * 9 See also
  * 10 Footnotes
  * 11 References
  * 12 Further reading
  * 13 External links

  
## [edit] Synopsis

The film begins with a prologue, the only commentary in the film. The
following text appears against a gray background: On 5 September 1934, â¦20
years after the outbreak of the World Warâ¦ 16 years after the beginning of
our sufferingâ¦ 19 months after the beginning of the German renaissanceâ¦
Adolf Hitler flew again to Nuremberg to review the columns of his faithful
followersâ¦

'Day 1': The film opens with shots of the clouds above the city, and then
moves through the clouds to float above the assembling masses below, with the
intention of portraying beauty and majesty of the scene. The shadow of
Hitler's plane is visible as it passes over the tiny figures marching
below,[3] accompanied by music from Richard Wagner's Die Meistersinger von
NÃ¼rnberg, which slowly turns into the Horst-Wessel-Lied. Upon arriving at the
Nuremberg airport, Hitler emerges from his plane to thunderous applause and a
cheering crowd. He is then driven into Nuremberg, through equally enthusiastic
people, to his hotel where a night rally is later held.

'Day 2': The second day begins with a montage of the attendees getting ready
for the opening of the Reich Party Congress, and then footage of the top Nazi
officials arriving at the Luitpold Arena. The film then cuts to the opening
ceremony, where Rudolf Hess announces the start of the Congress. The camera
then introduces much of the Nazi hierarchy and covers their opening speeches,
including Joseph Goebbels, Alfred Rosenberg, Hans Frank, Fritz Todt, Robert
Ley, and Julius Streicher. Then the film cuts to an outdoor rally for the
Reichsarbeitsdienst (Labor Service), which is primarily a series of pseudo-
military drills by men carrying shovels. This is also where Hitler gives his
first speech on the merits of the Labor Service and praising them for their
work in rebuilding Germany. The day then ends with a torchlight SA parade.

'Day 3': The third day starts with a Hitler Youth rally on the parade ground.
Again the camera covers the Nazi dignitaries arriving and the introduction of
Hitler by Baldur von Schirach. Hitler then addresses the Youth, describing in
militaristic terms how they must harden themselves and prepare for sacrifice.
Everyone present then assembles for a military pass and review, featuring
Wehrmacht cavalry and various armored vehicles. That night Hitler delivers
another speech to low-ranking party officials by torchlight, commemorating the
first year since the Nazis took power and declaring that the party and state
are one entity.

'Day 4': The fourth day is the climax of the film, where the most memorable of
the imagery is presented. As the soundtrack plays themes from Wagner's
GÃ¶tterdÃ¤mmerung, Hitler, flanked by Heinrich Himmler and Viktor Lutze, walks
through a long wide expanse with over 150,000 SA and SS troops standing at
attention, to lay a wreath at a World War I Memorial. Hitler then reviews the
parading SA and SS men, following which Hitler and Lutze deliver a speech
where they discuss the Night of the Long Knives purge of the SA several months
prior. Lutze reaffirms the SA's loyalty to the regime, and Hitler absolves the
SA of any crimes committed by Ernst RÃ¶hm. New party flags are consecrated by
touching them to the "blood banner" (the same cloth flag said to have been
carried by the fallen Nazis during the Beer Hall Putsch) and, following a
final parade in front of the Nuremberg Frauenkirche, Hitler delivers his
closing speech. In it he reaffirms the primacy of the Nazi Party in Germany,
declaring, "All loyal Germans will become National Socialists. Only the best
National Socialists are party comrades!" Hess then leads the assembled crowd
in a final Sieg Heil salute for Hitler, marking the close of the party
congress. The film fades to black as the entire crowd sings the "Horst-Wessel-
Lied".

## [edit] Origins

> Shortly after he came to power Hitler called me to see him and explained
that he wanted a film about a Party Congress, and wanted me to make it. My
first reaction was to say that I did not know anything about the way such a
thing worked or the organization of the Party, so that I would obviously
photograph all the wrong things and please nobody â even supposing that I
could make a documentary, which I had never yet done. Hitler said that this
was exactly why he wanted me to do it: because anyone who knew all about the
relative importance of the various people and groups and so on might make a
film that would be pedantically accurate, but this was not what he wanted. He
wanted a film showing the Congress through a non-expert eye, selecting just
what was most artistically satisfying â in terms of spectacle, I suppose you
might say. He wanted a film which would move, appeal to, impress an audience
which was not necessarily interested in politics. â Leni Riefenstahl[4]

Riefenstahl, a popular German actress, had directed her first movie called Das
Blaue Licht (The Blue Light) in 1932. Around the same time she first heard
Hitler speak at a Nazi rally and, by her own admission, was impressed. She
later began a correspondence with him that would last for years. Hitler, by
turn, was equally impressed with Das Blaue Licht, and in 1933 asked her to
direct a film about the Nazi's annual Nuremberg Rally. The Nazis had only
recently taken power amid a period of political instability (Hitler was the
fourth Chancellor of Germany in less than a year) and were considered an
unknown quantity by many Germans, to say nothing of the world.

Riefenstahl was initially reluctant, not because of any moral qualms, but
because she wanted to continue making feature films.  Hitler persisted and
Riefenstahl eventually agreed to make a film at the 1933 Nuremberg Rally
called Der Sieg des Glaubens (Victory of Faith). However the film had numerous
technical problems, including a lack of preparation (Riefenstahl reported
having just a few days) and Hitler's apparent unease at being filmed. To make
matters worse, Riefenstahl had to deal with infighting by party officials, in
particular Joseph Goebbels who tried to have the film released by the
Propaganda Ministry. Though Sieg apparently did well at the box office, it
later became a serious embarrassment to the Nazis after SA Leader Ernst RÃ¶hm,
who had a prominent role in the film, was executed during the Night of the
Long Knives. All references to RÃ¶hm were ordered to be erased from German
history, which included the destruction of all known copies of Der Sieg des
Glaubens.

In 1934, Riefenstahl had no wish to repeat the fiasco of Sieg and initially
recommended fellow director Walter Ruttmann. Ruttmann's film, which would have
covered the rise of the Nazi Party from 1923 to 1934 and been more overtly
propagandistic (the opening text of Triumph was his), did not appeal to
Hitler. He again asked Riefenstahl, who finally relented (there is still
debate over how willing she was) after Hitler guaranteed his personal support
and promised to keep other Nazi organizations, specifically the Propaganda
Ministry, from meddling with her film.

## [edit] Filmmaking

The film follows a similar script as Der Sieg des Glaubens which is evident
when one sees both films side by side, for example, the city of Nuremberg
scenes -- down to the shot of a cat that is included in the city driving
sequence in both films. Furthermore, Herbert Windt reused much of his musical
score for that film in Triumph des Willens which he also scored. But unlike
Sieg, Riefenstahl shot Triumph with a large budget, extensive preparations,
and vital help from high-ranking Nazis like Goebbels. As Susan Sontag
observed, "The Rally was planned not only as a spectacular mass meeting, but
as a spectacular propaganda film."[5] Albert Speer, Hitler's personal
architect, designed the set in Nuremberg and did most of the coordination for
the event.[3] Riefenstahl also used a film crew that was extravagant by the
standards of the day. Her crew consisted of 172 people, including 10 technical
staff, 36 cameramen and assistants (operating in 16 teams with 30 cameras),
nine aerial photographers, 17 newsreel men, 12 newsreel crew, 17 lighting men,
two photographers, 26 drivers, 37 security personnel, four labor service
workers, and two office assistants. Many of her cameramen also dressed in SA
uniforms so they could blend into the crowds.[6]

The New York Times has said it took almost two years to edit the final version
from 250 miles (400 km) of raw footage.[7] However, this time frame is
obviously incorrect, as there were only 200 days between the rally in
September 1934 and the premiere in March 1935. The New York Times is most
likely referring to Olympia, Riefenstahl's documentary about the 1936 Berlin
Olympic Games. In the documentary The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni
Riefenstahl, the 400,000 meters (250 miles) of footage and the two years of
editing are mentioned. In Triumph of the Will, however, Riefenstahl did have
the difficult task of condensing an estimated 61 hours of film into two
hours.[6] She labored to complete the film as fast as she could, going so far
as to sleep in the editing room filled with hundreds of thousands of feet of
film footage.[8]

## [edit] Themes

â [Triumph of the Will is] the supreme visualisation in cinematic form of
the Nazi political religion. Its artistry, reinforced by the grandeur and
power of the Nuremberg decor, is designed to sweep us into empathetic
identification with Hitler as a kind of human deity. The massive spectacle of
regimentation, unity and loyalty to the FÃ¼hrer powerfully conveys the message
that the Nazi movement was the living symbol of the reborn German nation. â  
â Professor Robert Wistrich[4]  
### [edit] Religion

â This morning's opening meetingâ¦ was more than a gorgeous show, it also
had something of the mysticism and religious fervor of an Easter or Christmas
Mass in a great Gothic cathedral. â  
â Reporter William Shirer[16]  
Religion is a major theme in Triumph. The film opens with a Point Of View
coming godlike out of the skies to alight on twin cathedral spires. It
contains many scenes of church bells ringing, and individuals in a state of
near-religious fervor, as well as a prominent shot of Reich Bishop Ludwig
MÃ¼ller standing in his vestments among high-ranking Nazis. It is probably not
a coincidence that the final parade of the film was held in front of the
Nuremberg Frauenkirche. In his final speech in the film, Hitler also directly
compares the Nazi party to a holy order, and the consecration of new party
flags by having Hitler touch them to the "blood banner" has obvious religious
overtones. Hitler himself is portrayed in a messianic manner, from the opening
where he descends from the clouds in a plane, to his drive through Nuremberg
where even a cat stops what it is doing to watch him, to the many scenes where
the camera films from below and looks up at him,[3] as Hitlerâ standing on
his podium â will issue a command to hundreds of thousands of followers. The
audience happily complies in unison.[3] Frank P. Tomasulo comments that in
Triumph, "Hitler is cast as a veritable German Messiah who will save the
nation, if only the citizenry will put its destiny in his hands."[9]

### [edit] Power

â It is our will that this state shall endure for a thousand years. â  
â Hitler  
Germany had not seen images of military power and strength since the end of
World War I, and the huge formations of men would remind the audience that
Germany was becoming a great power once again. Though the men carried shovels,
they handled them as if they were rifles. The Eagles and Swastikas could be
seen as a reference to the Roman Legions of antiquity.[17] The large mass of
well-drilled party members could be seen in a more ominous light, as a warning
to dissidents thinking of challenging the regime. Hitler's arrival in an
airplane should also be viewed in this context. According to Kenneth Poferl,
"Flying in an airplane was a luxury known only to a select few in the 1930s,
but Hitler had made himself widely associated with the practice, having been
the first politician to campaign via air travel. Victory reinforced this image
and defined him as the top man in the movement, by showing him as the only one
to arrive in a plane and receive an individual welcome from the crowd.
Hitler's speech to the SA also contained an implied threat: if he could have
RÃ¶hm â the commander of the hundreds of thousands of troops on the screen
â shot, it was only logical to assume that Hitler could get away with having
anyone executed."[3]

### [edit] Unity

â The Party is Hitler - and Hitler is Germany just as Germany is Hitler! â  
â Hess  
Triumph has many scenes that blur the distinction between the Nazi Party, the
German state, and the German people. Germans in peasant farmersâ costumes
and other traditional clothing greet Hitler in some scenes. The torchlight
processions, though now associated by many with the Nazis, would remind the
viewer of the medieval Karneval celebration. The old flag of Imperial Germany
is also shown several times flying alongside the Swastika, and there is a
ceremony where Hitler pays his respects to soldiers who died in World War I
(as well as President Paul von Hindenburg who had died a month before the
convention). There is also a scene where the Labor Servicemen individually
call out which town or area in Germany they are from, reminding the viewers
that the Nazi Party had expanded from its stronghold in Bavaria to become a
pan-Germanic movement.

## [edit] Hitler's speeches

Among the themes presented, the desire for pride in Germany and the
purification of the German people is well exemplified through the speeches and
ideals of the Third Reich in Triumph.

In every speech given and shown in Triumph, pride is one of the major focuses.
Hitler advocates to the people that they should not be satisfied with their
current state and they should not be satisfied with the dissention from power
and greatness Germany has endured since World War I. The German people should
believe in themselves and the movement that is occurring in Germany. Hitler
promotes pride in Germany through the unification of it. Unifying Germany
would force the elimination of what does not amount to the standards of the
Nazi regime.

To unify Germany, Hitler believes purification would have to take place. This
meant not only eliminating the citizens of Germany who are not of the Aryan
race, but the sick, weak, handicapped, or any other citizens deemed unhealthy
or impure. In Triumph, Hitler preaches to the people that Germany must take a
look at itself and seek out which does not belong: â[T]he elements that have
become bad, and therefore do not belong with us!â The elimination of the
âinferiorâ people of Germany would, in theory, return Germany to its once
prideful and powerful former self. Julius Streicher stresses the importance of
purification and the effects of what happens when purification does not take
place. These standards and regulations of the Nazi Party would underline the
racial injustices suffered throughout the rest of the Nazi reign in Germany.

Hitler preaches to the people in his speeches that they should believe in
their country and themselves. The German people are better than what they have
become because of the impurities in society. Hitler wants them to believe in
him and believe what he wants to do for his people, and what he is doing is
for the country's and people's benefit. Hess says in the last scene of
Triumph, âHail Hitler, hail victory, hail victory!â Everyone in attendance
yells in support. This verbal sign represents their faith to their leader and
his most trusted advisors they they believe in the Nazi cause. This is
directly followed by Hitler yelling, âLong live the National Socialist
Movement! Long live Germany!â and the crowd erupts with cheering and the
fulfillment of pride for themselves and their political party.

## [edit] Response

Triumph of the Will premiered on 28 March 1935 at the Berlin Ufa Palace
Theater and was an instant success. Within two months the film had earned
815,000 Reichsmark, and the Ufa considered it one of the three most profitable
films of that year.[3] Hitler praised the film as being an "incomparable
glorification of the power and beauty of our Movement." For her efforts,
Riefenstahl was rewarded with the German Film Prize (Deutscher Filmpreis), a
gold medal at the 1935 Venice Biennale, and the Grand Prix at the 1937 World
Exhibition in Paris.[9] However, there were few claims that the film would
result in a mass influx of 'converts' to fascism and the Nazis apparently did
not make a serious effort to promote the film outside of Germany. Film
historian Richard Taylor also said that Triumph was not generally used for
propaganda purposes inside the Third Reich,[10] although Roy Frumkes argued
that, on the contrary, it was shown each year in every German theater until
1945.[8] The Independent wrote in 2003: "Triumph of the Will seduced many wise
men and women, persuaded them to admire rather than to despise, and
undoubtedly won the Nazis friends and allies all over the world."[4]

The reception in other countries was not always as enthusiastic. British
documentarian Paul Rotha called it tedious, while others were repelled by its
pro-Nazi sentiments.[3] During World War II, Frank Capra made a direct
response called Why We Fight, a series of newsreels commissioned by the United
States government that spliced in footage from Triumph of the Will, but
recontextualized it so that it promoted the cause of the Allies instead. Capra
later remarked that Triumph "fired no gun, dropped no bombs. But as a
psychological weapon aimed at destroying the will to resist, it was just as
lethal."[11] Clips from Triumph were also used in an Allied propaganda short
called General Adolph Takes Over, set to the British dance tune "The Lambeth
Walk." The legions of marching soldiers, as well as Hitler giving his Nazi
salute, were made to look like wind-up dolls, dancing to the music. Also
during World War II, the poet Dylan Thomas wrote a screenplay for and narrated
These Are The Men, a propaganda piece using Triumph footage to discredit Nazi
leadership.

One of the best ways to gauge the response to Triumph was the instant and
lasting international fame it gave Riefenstahl. The Economist said it "sealed
her reputation as the greatest female filmmaker of the 20th century."[12] For
a director who made eight films, only two of which received significant
coverage outside of Germany, Riefenstahl had unusually high name recognition
for the remainder of her life, most of it stemming from Triumph. However, her
career was also permanently damaged by this association. After the war,
Riefenstahl was imprisoned by the Allies for four years for allegedly being a
Nazi sympathizer and was permanently blacklisted by the film industry. When
she died in 2003, 68 years after its premiere, her obituary received
significant coverage in many major publications -- including the Associated
Press,[13] Wall Street Journal,[14] New York Times,[7] and The Guardian[15]
\-- most of which reaffirmed the importance of Triumph.

Though the actual effectiveness of the media film Triumph of the Will is hard
to measure, in terms of numbers or statistics that actually state its
effectiveness, its response from the people is well-documented with the amount
of views and the popularity of the movie during the time period. One way to
measure the effectiveness of German propaganda, like Triumph, was how the
people treated the acts of the Nazis and their treatment and conduct towards
the Jewish people. German citizen reactions to the methods used by the Nazis
were merely to do nothing, and research proves that it was not well accepted.
ââ¦In the short run most of those who felt embarrassed learned to turn a
blind eye and retreat into non-political privacy. It was much easier to
conform than to swim against the streamâ.[5] Triumph influenced Germany and
its people to believe that Hitler and his cause were just. It helped the
people ease their tensions towards the Third Reich and their actions.

## [edit] Controversy

Like American filmmaker D. W. Griffith's The Birth of a Nation, Triumph of the
Will has been criticized as a use of spectacular filmmaking to promote a
system that is widely seen as both evil and profoundly reprehensible. In
Germany, this movie is classified as Nazi propaganda and its showing is
restricted under post-war denazification laws, but it may be shown in an
educational context. In her defense, Riefenstahl claimed that she was naÃ¯ve
about the Nazis when she made it and had no knowledge of Hitler's genocidal
policies. She also pointed out that Triumph contains "not one single
antisemitic word",[13] although it does contain a veiled comment by Julius
Streicher that "A people that does not protect its racial purity will perish."
However, Roger Ebert has observed that for some, "the very absence of
antisemitism in Triumph of the Will looks like a calculation; excluding the
central motif of almost all of Hitler's public speeches must have been a
deliberate decision to make the film more efficient as propaganda."[1]

Riefenstahl also repeatedly defended herself against the charge that she was a
Nazi propagandist, saying that Triumph focuses on images over ideas, and
should therefore be viewed as a Gesamtkunstwerk (total work of art)[citation
needed]. In 1964, she returned to this topic, saying:

    "If you see this film again today you ascertain that it doesn't contain a single reconstructed scene. Everything in it is true. And it contains no tendentious commentary at all. It is history. A pure historical filmâ¦ it is film-vÃ©ritÃ©. It reflects the truth that was then in 1934, history. It is therefore a documentary. Not a propaganda film. Oh! I know very well what propaganda is. That consists of recreating events in order to illustrate a thesis, or, in the face of certain events, to let one thing go in order to accentuate another. I found myself, me, at the heart of an event which was the reality of a certain time and a certain place. My film is composed of what stemmed from that."[5]
However, Riefenstahl was an active participant in the rally, though in later
years she downplayed her influence significantly, claiming, "I just observed
and tried to film it well. The idea that I helped to plan it is downright
absurd." Film critic Roy Frumkes has called Triumph "the antithesis of an
objective work" and suggested that because of the special accommodations
Riefenstahl received (one scene featured aerial searchlights requisitioned
from the Luftwaffe) and because "the film was altered by practically every in-
the-camera and laboratory special effect then known" the film can be labeled
anything except a documentary.[8] Ebert also disagreed, saying that Triumph is
"by general consent [one] of the best documentaries ever made", but added that
because it reflects the ideology of a movement regarded by many as evil, "[it
poses] a classic question of the contest between art and morality: Is there
such a thing as pure art, or does all art make a political statement?"[1] When
reviewing the film for his "Great Movies" collection, Ebert reversed his
opinion, characterizing his earlier conclusion as "the received opinion that
the film is great but evil" and calling it "a terrible film, paralyzingly
dull, simpleminded, overlong and not even 'manipulative,' because it is too
clumsy to manipulate anyone but a true believer."[6]

Susan Sontag considered Triumph of the Will the "most successful, most purely
propagandistic film ever made, whose very conception negates the possibility
of the filmmaker's having an aesthetic or visual conception independent of
propaganda."[7] Sontag points to Riefenstahl's involvement in the planning and
design of the Nuremberg ceremonies as evidence that Riefenstahl was working,
not as an artist in any sense of the word, but as propagandist. With some 30
cameras and a crew of 150, the marches, parades, speeches and processions were
orchestrated like a movie set for Riefenstahl's film. Nor was this the first
political film made by Riefenstahl for the Third Reich (there was Victory of
Faith, 1933, and Day of Freedom, shot in 1933[citation needed] and released in
1935). Nor was it the last (Olympia, 1938). "Anyone who defends Riefenstahl's
films as documentary", Sontag states, "if documentary is to be distinguished
from propaganda, is being ingenuous. In Triumph of Will, the document (the
image) is no longer simply the record of reality; 'reality' has been
constructed to serve the image."[8]

Brian Winston's essay on the film in The Movies as History: Visions of the
Twentieth Century, an anthology edited by David Ellwood, is largely a critique
of Sontag's analysis, which he finds faulty. His ultimate point is that any
filmmaker could have made the film look impressive because the Nazi's mise en
scÃ¨ne was impressive, particularly when they were offering it for camera re-
stagings. In form, the film alternates repetitively between marches and
speeches. Winston asks the viewers to consider if such a film should be seen
as anything more than a pedestrian effort. Like Rotha, he finds the film
tedious, and believes anyone who takes the time to analyze its structure will
quickly agree.

### [edit] Wehrmacht objections

The first controversy over Triumph occurred even before its release, when
several generals in the Wehrmacht protested over the minimal army presence in
the film. Only one scene, the review of the German cavalry, actually involved
the German military. The other formations were party organizations that were
not part of the military. Hitler proposed his own "artistic" compromise where
Triumph would open with a camera slowly tracking down a row of all the
"overlooked" generals (and placate each general's ego). According to her own
testimony, Riefenstahl refused his suggestion and insisted on keeping artistic
control over Triumph of the Will. She did agree to return to the 1935 rally to
make a film exclusively about the Wehrmacht, which became Tag der Freiheit:
Unsere Wehrmacht.[18]

## [edit] Influences and legacy

According to historian Philip Gavin, "The legacy of Triumph of the Will lives
on today in the numerous TV documentaries concerning the Nazi era which replay
portions of the filmâ¦ [Its] most enduring and dangerous illusion is that
Nazi Germany was a super-organized state, that, although evil in nature, was
impressive nonetheless."[16] Gavin believes that the reality of Nazism as a
disorganized and bureaucratic mess was obscured by Triumph of the Will's
powerful images of a united Fascist movement. Nicholas Reeves concurs, adding
that "many of the most enduring images of the Third Reich and Adolf Hitler
derive from Riefenstahl's film."[3]

Extensive excerpts of the film were used in the Swedish box office hit Mein
Kampf. This prompted Riefenstahl to sue the production company Minerva for
copyright violation. Although her case against Minerva was unresolved, she won
a temporary injunction agains the German distributor. Subsequently in order to
release the film, the German distributor agreed to pay Riefenstahl thirty
thousand marks for Germany's release and a further five thousand marks for
Austria's.[9]

## [edit] See also

  * List of German films 1933â1945
  * Nazism and cinema

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. a b c Ebert, Roger. "The Wonderful Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl." Chicago Sun-Times, 24 June 1994.
  2. a Triumph des Willens at the Internet Movie Database
  3. a b c d e Poferl, Kenneth. (2003). "An Evil Faith." Detailed comparison between Sieg des Glaubens and Triumph of the Will.
  4. a b FilmEducation.Org. Brief overview of the film and its place in history.
  5. a b c Cheshire, Ellen (2000). "Leni Riefenstahl: Documentary Film-Maker Or Propagandist?". Kamera: â. http://www.kamera.co.uk/features/leniriefenstahl.html.
  6. a b c "Triumph of the Will". http://classes.design.ucla.edu/Spring04/161A/projects/Wes/Exercise_B/mainpage.html. Retrieved on December 26 2005.
  7. a b Riding, Alan (9 September 2003). "Leni Riefenstahl, Filmmaker and Nazi Propagandist, Dies at 101". New York Times. pp. XX. http://www.nytimes.com/2003/09/09/obituaries/09CND-RIEF.html?ex=1135746000&en=9e79380becebb8dd&ei=5070.
  8. a b c d Frumkes, Roy (Essayist). (2001). "Triumph of the Will (Special Edition) [Film]." United States:Synapse Films.
  9. a b Butcher, Edmund. (2002). "Leni Riefenstahl - Art and Propaganda in Triumph of the Will." Questions the popular labels of Triumph as "art" or "propaganda".
  10. a Winston, Brian. (1997) "Triumph of the Will." Subscription required.
  11. a "Origins of Documentary film: Leni Riefenstahl". Reel Life Stories. http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/MRC/reellife/riefenstahl.htm. Retrieved on December 28 2005.
  12. a "Leni Riefenstahl: Hand-held history". The Economist. September, 2003. pp. XX. http://www.economist.com/displaystory.cfm?story_id=2051630.
  13. a b Rising, David (9 September 2003). "Hitler's filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl, revered and reviled for her work, dies at 101". Associated Press. pp. XX. http://www.signonsandiego.com/news/world/20030909-0525-obit-riefenstahl.html.
  14. a Petropolous, Jonathan (11 September 2003). "Leni Riefenstahl, Coy Propagandist Of the Nazi Era". Wall Street Journal. pp. XX. http://www.opinionjournal.com/la/?id=110003997.
  15. a Harding, Luke (10 September 2003). "Leni Riefenstahl, Hitler's favourite film propagandist, dies at 101". The Guardian. pp. XX. http://www.guardian.co.uk/international/story/0,3604,1039001,00.html.
  16. a b Gavin, Philip. (2001). "Triumph of Hitler." Focuses on the religious imagery and the SA controversy. Also briefly touches on the myth of Germany as a super-organized state.
  17. a Lenin Imports. "Leni Riefenstahl Triumph of the Will (1934)." Overview of the plot and imagery.
  18. a Chamorro, Enrique B. "DVD Comparison Triumph of the Will" and "DVD Comparison Day of Freedom."
  19. a Wolf, Naiomi. (2007). "[1]." Speech discussing recent book The End of America: A Letter of Warning to a Young Patriot.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Show Triumph of the Will: 46:55-1:00". http://www.humboldt.edu/~go1/sed741/film/triumph.html.
  2. ^ Hinton, David. "Triump of the Will: document or artifice?". JSTOR. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0009-7101(197523)15%3A1%3C48%3A%22OTWDO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-8.
  3. ^ a b Carl Rollyson (2007-03-07). "Leni Riefenstahl on Trial". The New York Sun. http://www.nysun.com/arts/leni-riefenstahl-on-trial/49944/. Retrieved on 2008-11-02.
  4. ^ Williams, Val (2003-09-10). "Leni Riefenstahl". The Independent. pp. XX. http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/leni-riefenstahl-548728.html.
  5. ^ (The Germans and the Final Solution)
  6. ^ Ebert, Roger (2008-06-26). "Review: Triumph of the Will (1935)". Sun-Times. http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20080626/REVIEWS08/911177318/1004. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  7. ^ ( "Fascinating Fascism" in B. Nichols (ed.) Movies & Methods, 1976)
  8. ^ (1976:36)
  9. ^ Bach, Steven (2006). Leni- The Life and Work of Leni Riefenstahl. Abacus.

  * "An Evil Faith.". "Victory of Faith & Triumph of the Will: Her Propaganda Marches On". http://1971films.com/Victory_of_Faith_Triumph_of_the_Will.htm. Retrieved on October 25 2005.
  * Cheshire, Ellen (2000). "Leni Riefenstahl: Documentary Film-Maker Or Propagandist?". Kamera. http://www.kamera.co.uk/features/leniriefenstahl.html.
  * Riding, Alan (9 September 2003). "Leni Riefenstahl, Filmmaker and Nazi Propagandist, Dies at 101". New York Times. pp. XX. http://www.nytimes.com/2003/09/09/obituaries/09CND-RIEF.html?ex=1135746000&en=9e79380becebb8dd&ei=5070.
  * Riefenstahl, Leni (Director). Triumph of the Will (Special Edition) [Film]. United States: Synapse Films.. (Includes film commentary by Dr. Anthony Santoro and essay by Roy Frumkes)
  * Smith, David Calvert (1990). Triumph of the Will: A Film by Leni Riefenstahl. Richardson, TX: Celluloid Chronicles Press. http://www.geocities.com/emruf4/triumph.html. (Complete Screenplay)
  * "Triumph of the Will". The Triumph of Hitler. http://www.historyplace.com/worldwar2/triumph/tr-will.htm. Retrieved on November 3 2005.
  * Oliver Grau (Ed.): Mediale Emotionen: Zur Lenkung von GefÃ¼hlen durch Bild und Sound, Frankfurt 2005.
  * "Triumph of the Will". http://classes.design.ucla.edu/Spring04/161A/projects/Wes/Exercise_B/mainpage.html. Retrieved on December 26 2005.
  * Welch, David (1993). The Third Reich Politics and Propaganda. New Fetter Lane, London: Routledge. pp. 65â72. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Third_Reich.
  * Deutsch, Bernard S (1934). Pierre Van Paassen. ed. Nazism: An Assault on Civilization. New York, NY: Harrison Smith and Robert Haas. pp. 41â43. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nazism.
  * Kershaw, Ian (1987). The Hitler Myth. Oxford, NY: Oxford University Press. pp. 48â49.
  * Bankier, David (1992). The Germans and the Final Solution. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers. pp. 48â49.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Shirer, William. Berlin Diary: The Journal of a Foreign Correspondent 1934â1941. New York, Alfred A. Knopf, 1941. Includes a contemporary account of the 1934 Nuremberg rally.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Triumph of
the Will  
  * Triumph of the Will at the Internet Movie Database
  * Triumph of the Will at Allmovie
  * Das Blaue Licht: The Art of Leni Riefenstahl Unofficial biographical website endorsed by the Riefenstahl Estate.
  * Invitation from Riefenstahl to Julius Streicher to the premier of Triumph. (German)
  * Triumph des Willens at Helmut Schmidt Online. (German)

v â¢ d â¢ e

Films directed by Leni Riefenstahl  
Das Blaue Licht (1932) â¢ Der Sieg des Glaubens (1933) â¢ Triumph of the
Will (1934) â¢ Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht (1935) â¢ Olympia (1938)
â¢ Tiefland (1954) â¢ Impressionen unter Wasser (2002)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Adolf Hitler  
Politics

Political beliefs Â· Speeches Â· Mein Kampf Â· Zweites Buch Â· Last will and
testament  
Events

Rise to power Â· Third Reich Â· Holocaust Â· World War II Â· Death  
Personal life

Home Â· Medical health Â· Religious beliefs Â· Sexuality Â· Diet  
Perceptions

Books Â· In popular culture Â· Der Sieg des Glaubens Â· Triumph of the Will Â·
The Empty Mirror Â· Hitler: The Last Ten Days Â· The Meaning of Hitler Â· Max
Â· Hitler: The Rise of Evil Â· Der Untergang (Downfall)  
Family

Eva Braun (wife) Â· Alois (father) Â· Klara (mother) Â· Alois (half-brother)
Â· Angela (half-sister) Â· Gustav (brother) Â· Ida (sister) Â· Otto (brother)
Â· Edmund (brother) Â· Paula (sister) Â· William Patrick (nephew) Â· Heinz
(nephew) Â· Geli (niece)  Â· Blondi (dog)  
Featured article

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triumph_of_the_Will"

Categories: German-language films | Nazi propaganda films | 1935 films | Films
of the Third Reich | Adolf Hitler | German documentary films | Black and white
films | Nuremberg Rally films | Films directed by Leni Riefenstahl

Hidden categories: Articles containing German language text | All articles
with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February
2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Featured articles

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Ido
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 March 2009, at 18:09.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



