
# Fight Club (film)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Fight Club  
<IMG>  
Theatrical release poster  
Directed by David Fincher  
Produced by Art Linson  
Ross Grayson Bell  
Cean Chaffin  
Written by Novel:  
Chuck Palahniuk  
Screenplay:  
Jim Uhls  
Starring Edward Norton  
Brad Pitt  
Helena Bonham Carter  
Music by Dust Brothers  
Cinematography Jeff Cronenweth  
Editing by James Haygood  
Distributed by 20th Century Fox  
Release date(s) October 15, 1999  
Running time 139 min.  
Country United States  
Language English  
Budget US$63 million  
Gross revenue US$100,853,753 (worldwide)  
Fight Club is a 1999 American feature film adaptation of the 1996 novel of the
same name by Chuck Palahniuk. The film was directed by David Fincher and
follows a nameless protagonist (Edward Norton), an everyman and an unreliable
narrator who feels trapped with his white-collar position in society. The
narrator gets involved in a fight club with soap salesman Tyler Durden (Brad
Pitt) and becomes tangled up in a relationship triangle with Durden and a
destitute woman, Marla Singer (Helena Bonham Carter).

Palahniuk's novel was optioned by producer Laura Ziskin, who hired Jim Uhls to
write the script for the film. Several directors were sought to film Fight
Club; David Fincher was hired to direct based on his interest in the project
despite his previous difficulties with the studio 20th Century Fox. Fincher
worked with Uhls to develop the script, seeking advice from others in the film
industry and his own cast members. Fincher described Fight Club as black
comedy that applies heavy satire; he and the cast also compared the film to
Rebel Without a Cause (1955) and The Graduate (1967). Thematically, the film
was intended to represent the conflict between a generation of young people
and the value system of advertising. The film's use of violence in the fight
clubs was intended to serve as a metaphor for feeling based on the
generation's conflict. The director carried homoerotic overtones over from
Palahniuk's novel to implement in the film, believing that the overtones would
make audiences uncomfortable and thereby keep them from anticipating the twist
ending.

Studio executives were not receptive to the film, and they altered Fincher's
intended marketing campaign to try to recoup perceived losses. Fight Club
failed to meet expectations at the box office, and the film received polarized
reactions from film critics. The film was cited as one of the most
controversial and talked-about films of 1999. It was perceived as ground-
breaking for its visual style in cinema and presaging a new mood in American
political life. The film later found commercial success with its DVD release,
which established Fight Club as a cult film. The film has also permeated
American society, inspiring people to set up fight clubs.

## Contents

  * 1 Plot
  * 2 Production
    * 2.1 Development
    * 2.2 Casting
    * 2.3 Writing
    * 2.4 Filming
    * 2.5 Cinematography
    * 2.6 Visual effects
    * 2.7 Musical score
  * 3 Filmmakers' themes
    * 3.1 Values
    * 3.2 Characters
  * 4 Release
    * 4.1 Marketing
    * 4.2 Theatrical run
    * 4.3 Home media
  * 5 Critical reception
  * 6 Cultural impact
  * 7 References
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 Further reading
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Plot

The narrator (Edward Norton) is an automobile company employee who travels to
accident sites to perform product recall cost appraisals. His doctor refuses
to write a prescription for his insomnia and instead suggests that he visit a
support group for testicular cancer victims in order to appreciate real
suffering. When he attends the group, the narrator allows himself to weep as a
form of emotional release. He is then able to sleep soundly and subsequently
fakes more illnesses so he can attend other support groups in order to get out
his pent up emotions through crying. The narrator's routine is disrupted when
he begins to notice another impostor, Marla Singer (Helena Bonham Carter), at
the same meetings and his insomnia returns.

During a flight for a business trip, the narrator meets Tyler Durden (Brad
Pitt), who makes and sells soap. The narrator arrives home to find his
apartment has been destroyed by an explosion. He calls Tyler and meets him at
a bar. Tyler agrees to let the narrator stay at his home on the condition that
the narrator hits him. The narrator complies and the two end up enjoying a
fist fight outside the bar. The narrator moves into Tyler's dilapidated house
and the two return to the bar, where they have another fight in the parking
lot. After attracting a crowd, they establish a 'fight club' in the bar's
basement.

When Marla overdoses on Xanax, she is rescued by Tyler and the two embark upon
a sexual relationship. Tyler tells the narrator never to talk about him to
Marla. Under Tyler's leadership, the fight club becomes "Project Mayhem,"
which commits increasingly destructive acts of anti-materialist vandalism in
the city. The fight clubs become a network for Project Mayhem, and the
narrator is left out of Tyler's activities with the project. After an
argument, Tyler disappears from the narrator's life and when a member of
Project Mayhem dies on a mission, the narrator attempts to shut down the
project. Tracing Tyler's steps, he travels around the country to find that
fight clubs have been started in every major city, where one of the
participants identifies him as Tyler Durden. A phone call to Marla confirms
his identity and he realizes that Tyler is an alter ego of his own split
personality. Tyler appears before him and explains that he controls the
narrator's body whenever he is asleep.

The narrator faints and awakes to find Tyler has made several phone calls
during his blackout and traces his plans to the downtown headquarters of
several major credit card companies, which Tyler intends to destroy in order
to cripple the financial networks. Failing to find help with the police, many
of whom are members of Project Mayhem, the narrator attempts to disarm the
explosives in the basement of one of the buildings. He is confronted by Tyler,
knocked unconscious, and taken to the upper floor of another building to
witness the impending destruction. The narrator, held by Tyler at gunpoint,
realizes that in sharing the same body with Tyler, he is the one who is
actually holding the gun. He fires it into his mouth, shooting through the
cheek without killing himself. The illusion of Tyler collapses with an exit
wound to the back of his head. Shortly after, members of Project Mayhem bring
a kidnapped Marla to the narrator and leave them alone. The bombs detonate
and, holding hands, the two witness the destruction of the entire financial
city block through the windows.

## [edit] Production

### [edit] Development

In 1996, a 20th Century Fox book scout sent a galley proof of Chuck
Palahniuk's novel Fight Club to creative executive Kevin McCormick. Despite a
studio reader discouraging a film adaptation of the material, McCormick passed
the proof on to producers Lawrence Bender and Art Linson, who in turn also
rejected it. Producers Josh Donen and Ross Bell then expressed interest in the
project and arranged unpaid screen readings with actors, initially lasting six
hours, to determine the length of a script. After cutting out sections to
reduce the running time and recording the dialogue, Bell sent the book on tape
to Laura Ziskin, head of the division Fox 2000, who after listening to the
tape purchased the rights to Fight Club for $10,000.[1]

To adapt the story into a screenplay, Ziskin initially considered hiring Buck
Henry; Ziskin thought that Fight Club was similar to The Graduate, which had
been adapted by Henry. However, a new screenwriter, Jim Uhls, began lobbying
Donen and Bell to be hired to adapt the screenplay and was subsequently chosen
by the producers over Henry. For directing, Bell had four options in mind:
Peter Jackson, Bryan Singer, Danny Boyle, and David Fincher. Bell considered
Jackson the best choice and contacted the director, but Jackson was too busy
filming The Frighteners (1996) in New Zealand. Singer received the book, but
did not read it, while Boyle met with Bell and read the book, he ultimately
pursued another project. Fincher, who had previously read the book and tried
to buy the rights himself, talked with Ziskin about directing the film, but
was hesitant to work with 20th Century Fox again after his bad experiences
with the studio during AlienÂ³ (1992). A meeting with Ziskin and studio head
Bill Mechanic restored his relationship with the studio,[1] and in August
1997, 20th Century Fox announced that Fincher would helm the film adaptation
of the novel.[2] Mechanic and Ziskin initially planned to finance the film
with a $23 million budget.[1]

### [edit] Casting

Producer Ross Bell met with actor Russell Crowe to discuss portraying Tyler
Durden, while at the same time producer Art Linson, who had lately joined the
project, was negotiating with Brad Pitt for the same role. Due to Linson's
seniority, Pitt was cast over Crowe.[1] Pitt, who was seeking a new project
after the failure of his previous film, Meet Joe Black (1998), was hired for
$17.5 million, the studio believing that Fight Club would be more commercially
successful with a major star.[3] Likewise for the role of the nameless
narrator, the studio desired a "sexier marquee name" like Matt Damon to
increase the film's visibility (Sean Penn was also considered), but Fincher
sought to cast Edward Norton in that role, based on the actor's performance in
The People vs. Larry Flynt (1996).[4] Norton had also been approached by other
studios for leading roles in films like The Talented Mr. Ripley (1999) and Man
on the Moon (1999), and he temporarily pursued Runaway Jury (2003) before that
project fell apart. To lure him away from the other projects, Fox offered
Norton a salary of $2.5 million, but Norton could not immediately accept, as
he still owed Paramount Pictures a film. Norton therefore signed a new
contract with Paramount for a lesser salary, eventually being contractually
obligated to take a role in The Italian Job (2003).[3] In January 1998, Brad
Pitt and Edward Norton officially joined the project to portray Tyler Durden
and the nameless narrator, respectively.[5]

Actresses Courtney Love and Winona Ryder were considered to portray Marla
Singer,[6] and the studio would have cast Reese Witherspoon were it not for
Fincher's objections that the actress was too young.[3] Ultimately, Helena
Bonham Carter was cast in the role, based on her performance in The Wings of
the Dove (1997).[7]

To prepare for their roles, Norton and Pitt took lessons in boxing, taekwondo,
and grappling,[8] in addition to soapmaking classes from boutique company
owner Auntie Godmother.[9] For the cosmetics of his role, Pitt voluntarily
visited a dentist to have pieces of his front teeth chipped off, which were
restored after filming concluded.[10]

### [edit] Writing

Screenwriter Jim Uhls began working on the adaptation from an earlier draft
which lacked a voice-over due to the industry's perspective at the time that
the technique was "hackneyed and trite". When Fincher joined the project, he
disagreed with the approach, believing that the film's humor came from the
narrator's voice,[3] and described the film without voice-over as seemingly
"sad and pathetic".[11] The director and Uhls developed the script for six to
seven months, creating a third draft by 1997 that reordered the story and left
out several major elements. When Pitt came on board, the actor expressed
concern that Tyler Durden was too one-dimensional, so Fincher sought the
advice of writer-director Cameron Crowe, who suggested giving the character
more ambiguity. Fincher also hired screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker and
invited Pitt and Norton to collaborate on rewriting the script, which was
completed after a year of work and five drafts.[3] The narrator was written to
be nameless in the film, although he is identified in the script as Jack. The
narrator's aliases in the support groups that he attends were based on
characters from Planet of the Apes and Robert De Niro roles of the 1970s.[12]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The bathtub scene served as part of the director's intended homoerotic
presentation to make audiences uncomfortable and unprepared for the film's
coming events.

Author Chuck Palahniuk praised the faithful film adaptation of his novel Fight
Club and applauded the fact that the plot of the film was more streamlined
than that of the book. Palahniuk also noted the contention over the
believability for film audiences of the novel's plot twist, the inclusion of
which director David Fincher supported by saying, "If they accept everything
up to this point, they'll accept the plot twist. If they're still in the
theater, they'll stay with it." Palahniuk was, however, annoyed by the film's
change of a single ingredient in its explanation on making napalm, which
rendered the recipe useless, since the author had researched the components
extensively.[13] Palahniuk's novel also contained homoerotic overtones, which
the director deliberately included in the film in order to make audiences
uncomfortable and thereby accentuate the surprise of the film's twists and
turns.[14] The scene in which Tyler Durden bathes next to the narrator is an
example of such overtones, although Durden's insight in the scene, "I'm
wondering if another woman is really the answer we need," was meant to suggest
personal responsibility rather than homosexuality.[15] Another example of the
overtones was the scene at the beginning of the film in which Tyler Durden
puts a gun barrel down the narrator's mouth.[16]

At the end of the film, the narrator finds redemption in rejecting Tyler
Durden's dialectic, which is a divergence from the novel's end, in which the
narrator is placed in a mental institution.[17] Norton notes the film's
redemptive parallel to The Graduate, as the protagonists of both films find a
middle ground between two divisions of self.[18] The director also considered
the novel too infatuated with Tyler Durden and altered the ending to pull away
from him, saying, "I wanted people to love Tyler, but I also wanted them to be
OK with his vanquishing."[17]

### [edit] Filming

<IMG>

<IMG>

The interior of Tyler Durden's Paper Street home was designed to possess a
sense of decay to reflect the deconstructed world of the characters.

When production first began, the initial $50 million budget, of which half was
paid by New Regency, escalated to a peak of $67 million. New Regency's head
and Fight Club executive producer Arnon Milchan petitioned Fincher to reduce
the budget by at least $5 million, but the director refused to cut costs, so
Milchan contacted studio head Bill Mechanic, saying that he would back out. To
bring back Milchan's support, Mechanic sent him tapes of dailies, and after
three weeks of shooting, Milchan returned his support and financed half of the
production budget.[19]

Filming lasted 138 days,[20] during which Fincher shot more than 1,500 rolls
of film, three times the average for a Hollywood film.[8] Filming locations
were in and around Los Angeles and on sets built at the studio's location in
Century City.[20] Production designer Alex McDowell constructed more than 70
sets.[8] The exterior of Tyler Durden's home on Paper Street was built in San
Pedro, California, while the interiors, given a decayed look to reflect the
deconstructed world of the characters, were built on a sound stage at the
studio's location.[20] Marla's apartment was based on photographs of the
Rosalind Apartments in downtown L.A.[11]

Fighting in the film was heavily choreographed, and fighters were required to
"go full out" during fight scenes to capture realistic effects such as having
the wind knocked out of oneself.[21] To enhance the scenes, makeup artist
Julie Pearce, who collaborated with the director on The Game, studied mixed
martial arts and pay-per-view boxing for her work on the fighters. She also
designed an extra to have a chunk missing from his ear, for which she cited
Mike Tyson's bite as inspiration.[22] To create sweat on cue, makeup artists
devised two methods: spraying water over a coat of Vaseline, and using
straight water for "wet sweat". Meat Loaf, who plays a member of the fight
club who has "bitch tits", wore a 90-pound (40 kg) fat harness that gave him
large breasts for the role.[8] He also wore eight-inch (20 cm) lifts in his
scenes with Norton, being shorter than the lead actor.[15]

Overall production included 300 scenes, 200 locations, and complex special
effects. Fincher compared Fight Club to his succeeding and less complex
project Panic Room (2002), "I felt like I was spending all my time watching
trucks being loaded and unloaded so I could shoot three lines of dialogue.
There was far too much transportation going on."[23]

### [edit] Cinematography

Fight Club was shot in the Super 35 format to give the director maximum
flexibility in composing shots. To direct the cinematography for the film,
director David Fincher hired Jeff Cronenweth, the son of the late
cinematographer Jordan Cronenweth with whom Fincher had collaborated for
AlienÂ³ (1992). Fincher and Cronenweth drew from elements of the visual styles
that Fincher had begun exploring in Se7en and The Game. For the narrator's
scenes without Tyler Durden, the look was purposely bland and realistic, while
for scenes with Tyler, Fincher chose a look that was "more hyper-real in a
torn-down, deconstructed senseâa visual metaphor of what [the narrator is]
heading into". Heavily desaturated colors were used in the costuming, makeup,
and art direction, and the crew took advantage of as much natural and
practical light at filming locations as possible. The director also took
various approaches to take advantage of lighting situations in the film's
scenes, and several practical locations were chosen for the city lights'
effects on the shots' backgrounds. Fluorescent lighting at practical locations
was also embraced to maintain an element of reality and to light the
prosthetics of the characters' injuries appropriately.[20] On the other hand,
Fincher also ensured that scenes were darkened enough to reduce the visibility
of the characters' eyes, citing cinematographer Gordon Willis's technique as
the influence.[15]

The majority of Fight Club was filmed at night, with daytime shots taking
place in purposely shadowed locations. For the first scenes of the actual
indoor fight club in Lou's basement, the area was lit by inexpensive work
lamps to create a background glow. The director also chose to film fight
scenes in the basement from a more objective view, purposely avoiding stylish
camerawork and instead placing the camera in a fixed position. As the fight
scenes in the film progressed, the camera moved from the point of view of a
distant observer to that of the fighter.[20]

Scenes of Tyler Durden were staged to conceal the film's twist; the character
was not filmed in two shots with a group of people, nor was he shown in any
over the shoulder shots in scenes where Tyler gives the narrator specific
ideas that are going to "lead him". Durden is also present in single frames of
the narrator's scenes before the narrator actually meets Durden,[11] appearing
in the background and out of focus, like a "little devil on the shoulder".[15]
Regarding these subliminal frames, Fincher explained, "Our hero is creating
Tyler Durden in his own mind, so at this point he exists only on the periphery
of the narrator's consciousness."[24]

### [edit] Visual effects

<IMG>

<IMG>

The opening scene in Fight Club that represents a brain's neural network in
which the thought processes are initiated by the narrator's fear impulse. The
network was mapped using an L-system and drawn out by a medical illustrator.

As visual effects supervisor, Kevin Tod Haug, who had collaborated with
director David Fincher on The Game, divided the VFX artists and experts into
different facilities, each responsible for addressing a separate aspect of the
film's visual effects: CG modeling, animation, compositing, and scanning.
According to Haug, "We selected the best people for each aspect of the effects
work, then coordinated their efforts. In this way, we never had to play to a
facility's weakness." Fincher chose to illustrate the nameless narrator's
perspective with a "mind's eye" view and to create a myopic framework for the
film's audience. Fincher also utilized previsualized footage of challenging
main-unit and visual effects shots as a problem-solving tool to avoid making
mistakes during the actual filming.[24]

The film's title sequence is a 90-second pullback scene from the fear center
of the narrator's brain, representing the thought processes initiated by the
narrator's fear impulse.[11] The sequence, designed in part by Fincher, was
budgeted separately from the rest of the film, but the studio later paid for
the sequence based on Fincher's expert direction of the film.[15] For the
visual effects of the sequence, Fincher hired Digital Domain and its visual
effects supervisor Kevin Mack, who had won an Academy Award for Visual Effects
for What Dreams May Come (1998). The computer-generated brain was mapped using
an L-system,[25] and the design was detailed using renderings by medical
illustrator Kathryn Jones. The pullback sequence from within the brain to the
outside of the skull included neurons, action potentials, and a hair follicle.
Concerning the artistic license that Fincher took with the shot, Haug
explained, "While he wanted to keep the brain passage looking like electron
microscope photography, that look had to be coupled with the feel of a night
diveâwet, scary, and with a low depth of field." The shallow depth of field
was accomplished with the process of ray tracing.[24]

One of the earliest scenes in the film, in which the camera flashes past city
streets to survey Project Mayhem's destructive equipment lying in underground
parking lots, was a three-dimensional composition of nearly 100 photographs of
Los Angeles and Century City by photographer Michael Douglas Middleton. The
final scene of demolishing the credit card office buildings was designed by
Richard Baily of Image Savant, who worked on the scene for over 14 months.[24]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The sequence in which Tyler Durden (Pitt) points out a cue mark is a thematic
element implemented by the director to reflect the point after which reality
would become subverted.

The director gave a lurid style to the color palette of the film, choosing to
make people "sort of shiny"; Helena Bonham Carter wore opalescent makeup to
create a "smack-fiend patina" that would portray her romantic nihilistic
character best. The director and cinematographer Jeff Cronenweth were also
influenced by American Graffiti (1973), which applied a mundane look to
nighttime exteriors while simultaneously including a variety of colors. When
Fight Club was processed, several techniques were applied to alter the
footage. The contrast was stretched to be purposely ugly, the print was
adjusted to be underexposed, resilvering (lower-scale enhancement) was used to
increase density, and high-contrast print socks were stepped all over the
print to create a dirty patina.[11]

Fincher included the cue mark sequence, in which Durden points out the
"cigarette burn" flash, to serve as a thematic element. The sequence
represents a turning point, foreshadowing the coming rupture and inversion of
the "fairly subjective reality" that characterizes the initial progression of
the film. "Suddenly it's as though the projectionist missed the changeover,
the viewers have to start looking at the movie in a whole new way," explained
Fincher.[24]

### [edit] Musical score

For the musical score, the director was concerned that bands experienced in
performing film music would be unable to tie the movie's themes together, so
for this reason, he sought a band which had never recorded for film before.
Radiohead was pursued as a possible choice,[15] but the breakbeat producer duo
Dust Brothers was ultimately chosen to score the film. The duo created a post-
modern score that included drum loops, electronic scratches, and computerized
samples because, as Dust Brothers performer Michael Simpson explains, "Fincher
wanted to break new ground with everything about the movie, and a
nontraditional score helped achieve that."[26]

## [edit] Filmmakers' themes

### [edit] Values

"I feel that Fight Club really, in a way... probed into the despair and
paralysis that people feel in the face of having inherited this value system
out of advertising."

âEdward Norton[27]  
Director David Fincher described Fight Club as a black comedy that applies
heavy satire.[15] To avoid a potentially sinister nature, Fincher purposefully
kept the film "funny and seditious",[17] while Norton described the film as a
"dark, comic, sort of surrealist look" at young people's failures to interact
with the value system of which they are expected to be a part.[28] Fight Club
parallels Rebel Without a Cause by probing into the frustrations of the people
that live in the system.[27] The characters, having undergone societal
emasculation, are reduced to "a generation of spectators",[29] while a culture
of advertising defines society's "external signifiers of happiness" and causes
an unnecessary chase for material objects that replaces the more essential
pursuit of spiritual happiness.[30] Pitt explained, "I think there's a self
defense mechanism that keeps my generation from having any real honest
connection or commitment with our true feelings. We're rooting for ball teams,
but we're not getting in there to play. We're so concerned with failure and
successâlike these two things are all that's going to sum you up at the
end."[21]

"Fight Club is a metaphor for the need to push through the walls we put around
ourselves and just go for it, so for the first time we can experience the
pain."

âBrad Pitt[21]  
The violence of the fight clubs serves as a metaphor for feeling, rather than
to promote or glorify physical combat.[31] The fights are tangible
representations of resisting the impulse to be cocooned in society.[29] Norton
explained that the fighting between the men strips away the "fear of pain" and
"the reliance on material signifiers of their self-worth", leaving them to
really experience something valuable.[27] When the fights transform into
revolutionary violence, the film only half-accepts this dialectic by Tyler
Durden, with the narrator pulling back and rejecting Durden's ideas.[18] Thus
Fight Club purposely shapes an ambiguous message, the interpretation of which
is left to the film audiences.[32] As Fincher elaborated, "I love this idea
that you can have fascism without offering any direction or solution. Isn't
the point of fascism to say, 'This is the way we should be going'? But this
movie couldn't be further from offering any kind of solution."[17]

### [edit] Characters

In Fight Club, the nameless narrator is an everyman who lacks a world of
possibilities and initially cannot find a way to change his life. The narrator
finds himself unable to match society's requirements for happiness and so
embarks on a path to enlightenment which involves metaphorically killing his
parents, his God, and his teacher. At the beginning of the film, the narrator
has killed off his parents but still finds himself trapped in his false world.
The narrator then meets Tyler Durden, with whom he kills his metaphorical God
by going against the norms of society. Ultimately, the narrator has to kill
his teacher, Tyler Durden, to complete the process of maturity.[11]

Screenwriter Jim Uhls described the film as a "romantic comedy", explaining,
"It has to do with the characters' attitudes toward a healthy relationship,
which is a lot of behavior which seems unhealthy and harsh to each other, but
in fact does work for themâbecause both characters are out on the edge
psychologically."[33] In the film, the narrator seeks intimacy, but he avoids
it at first with Marla Singer, seeing too much of himself in her.[15] Though
Marla presents a seductive and negativist prospect for the narrator, he
instead embraces the novelty and excitement that Tyler Durden has to offer
him. The narrator finds himself comfortable having the personal connection to
Tyler Durden, but he becomes jealous when Marla becomes sexually involved with
Tyler. When the narrator argues with Tyler about their friendship, Tyler
explains that the relationship between the two men is secondary to the active
pursuit of the philosophy they had been exploring.[18] Tyler also suggests
doing something about Marla, implying that she is a risk to be removed. When
Tyler says this, the narrator realizes that his desires should have been
focused on Marla and begins to diverge from Tyler's path.[15]

"We decided early on that I would start to starve myself as the film went on,
while [Brad Pitt] would lift and go to tanning beds; he would become more and
more idealized as I wasted away."

âEdward Norton[34]  
The unreliable narrator is not immediately aware that Tyler Durden is, in
fact, himself,[11] and he also mistakenly promotes the fight clubs as a way to
feel powerful.[28] Contrarily, the narrator's physical condition worsens while
Tyler Durden's appearance improves. Although Tyler initially embarks on a
journey with the narrator in desiring the "real experiences" of actual
fights,[27] he eventually becomes a Nietzschean model that manifests the
nihilistic attitude of rejecting and destroying institutions and value
systems.[32] His impulsive nature, representing the id,[15] conveys an
attitude that is seductive and liberating to the narrator and the followers.
However, Tyler's initiatives and methods eventually become dehumanizing,[32]
as when he orders around the members of Project Mayhem with a megaphone in
similar fashion to the approach of Chinese re-education camps.[15] At this
point, the narrator pulls back from Tyler and retreats as Tyler moves forward.
In the end, the narrator is able to arrive at a middle ground between his two
conflicting selves.[18]

## [edit] Release

### [edit] Marketing

<IMG>

<IMG>

The advertising firm Wieden+Kennedy created a pink bar of soap as the main
marketing image; studio executives, while not hindering the image, considered
the concept "a bad joke".

In early 1999, after filming had concluded the previous December, David
Fincher edited the footage to prepare Fight Club for a preliminary screening
with senior executives. They did not receive the film positively, expressing
concern that there would not be an audience that would watch it.[35] Executive
producer Art Linson, who supported the film, recalled the response, "So many
incidences of Fight Club were alarming, no group of executives could narrow
them down."[36] Nevertheless, Fight Club was originally slated to be released
in July 1999,[37] later changed to August 6, 1999. The studio further delayed
the film's release, this time to autumn, due to a crowded summer schedule and
a hurried post-production process,[38] although outsiders attributed the
delays to the Columbine High School massacre earlier in the year.[39]

Marketing executives at Twentieth Century Fox faced difficulties in marketing
Fight Club and at one point considered marketing it as an art film. Because of
the film's violence, they considered it primarily geared toward male audiences
and believed that not even the presence of Brad Pitt would attract female
filmgoers. Research testing showed that the film appealed to teenagers.
Fincher refused to let the posters and trailers focus on Brad Pitt and
encouraged the studio to hire the advertising firm Wieden+Kennedy to devise a
marketing plan. The firm came up with a bar of pink soap as the film's main
marketing image, which was considered "a bad joke" by Fox executives. Fincher
also released two early trailers in the form of faux public service
announcements presented by Pitt and Norton which the studio considered as
inappropriate introductions to the movie. Instead, the studio financed a $20
million large-scale campaign to provide a press junket, posters, billboards,
and trailers for TV that highlighted the film's fight scenes. Fight Club was
also advertised on cable during World Wrestling Federation broadcasts, which
Fincher protested, believing that the placement created the wrong context for
the film.[35] Linson believed that the "ill-conceived one-dimensional"
marketing by marketing executive Robert Harper largely contributed to Fight
Club's lukewarm box office performance.[40]

### [edit] Theatrical run

The film held its world premiere at the 56th Venice International Film
Festival on September 10, 1999.[41] The studio had hired the National Research
Group to test screen the film, and the group had indicated that the film would
gross between $13 million and $15 million for its opening weekend.[42] Fight
Club commercially opened in the United States and Canada on October 15, 1999
and earned $11,035,485 in 1,963 theaters over the opening weekend,[43] placing
it at #1 for the weekend and ahead of Double Jeopardy and The Story of Us, a
fellow weekend opener.[44] The gender mix of audiences for Fight Club,
initially argued to be "the ultimate anti-date flick", was 61% male and 39%
female, with 58% of audiences below the age of 21. Despite the top placement,
its opening reception had fallen short of the studio's expectations,[45] and
over the second weekend, Fight Club dropped 42.6% in revenue, earning
$6,335,870.[46] The film, whose production budget was $63 million, went on to
gross $37,030,102 during its theatrical run in the United States and Canada
and earned $100,853,753 in theaters worldwide.[43] The underwhelming North
American performance of Fight Club soured the relationship between studio head
Bill Mechanic and media executive Rupert Murdoch, eventually leading to the
resignation of Mechanic in June 2000.[47]

For the UK release of Fight Club on November 12, 1999, the British Board of
Film Classification removed two scenes involving "an indulgence in the
excitement of beating a (defenseless) man's face into a pulp" and awarded the
film an 18 certificate, limiting the release to adult-only audiences in the
UK. The BBFC did not censor any further, having considered and dismissed
claims that Fight Club contained "dangerously instructive information" and
could "encourage anti-social [behavior]". As the board noted, "The film as a
whole isâquite clearlyâcritical and sharply parodic of the amateur fascism
which in part it portrays. Its central theme of male machismo (and the anti-
social behaviour that flows from it) is emphatically rejected by the central
character in the concluding reels."[48] The scenes were restored in a two-
edition DVD edition released in the UK in March 2007.[49]

### [edit] Home media

<IMG>

<IMG>

Physical packaging of two-disc special edition

The DVD for Fight Club was one of the first to be supervised by the film's
director and was released in two editions.[50] Working on the DVD for Fight
Club was a way for the director to finish his vision for the film. 20th
Century Fox's senior vice president of creative development, Julie Markell,
explained how the DVD packaging complemented the vision: "The film is meant to
make you question. The package, by extension, tries to reflect an experience
that you must experience for yourself. The more you look at it, the more
you'll get out of it." The packaging was developed for two months by the
studio.[51] The single-disc edition included a commentary track,[52] while the
two-disc special edition included the commentary track, multiple behind-the-
scenes clips, deleted scenes, trailers, public service announcements, the
promotional music video "This is Your Life", Internet spots, still galleries,
cast biographies, storyboards, and publicity materials.[53] When the two-disc
special edition DVD was first released, it was physically packaged to look
covered in brown cardboard wrapper. Markell elaborated, "We wanted the package
to be simple on the outside, so that there would be a dichotomy between the
simplicity of brown paper wrapping and the intensity and chaos of what's
inside."[51] 20th Century Fox's vice president of marketing, Deborah Mitchell,
described the design: "From a retail standpoint, [the DVD case] has incredible
shelf-presence."[54]

Fight Club won the 2000 Online Film Critics Society Awards for Best DVD, Best
DVD Commentary, and Best DVD Special Features,[55] while Entertainment Weekly
ranked the film's two-disc edition #1 in its 2001 list of "The 50 Essential
DVDs", giving top ratings to the DVD's content and technical picture-and-audio
quality.[56] In 2004, after the two-disc edition went out of print, the studio
re-released it due to fans' requests.[57] The DVD was one of the largest-
selling in the studio's history.[40] The film also grossed $55 million in
video and DVD rentals.[58] With a lukewarm box office performance in the
United States, a better performance in other territories overseas, and the
highly successful DVD release, Fight Club generated a $10 million profit.[40]

## [edit] Critical reception

"It touched a nerve in the male psyche that was debated in newspapers across
the world."

âThe Times on the film's theatrical release[59]  
When Fight Club premiered at the Venice International Film Festival, the film
was fiercely debated by critics. The Ottawa Citizen reported, "Many loved and
hated it in equal measures." Concerns were expressed that the film would
incite copycat behavior like when A Clockwork Orange debuted in Britain nearly
three decades previously.[60] While filmmakers called Fight Club "an accurate
portrayal of men in the 1990s", critics called it "irresponsible and
appalling". The Australian wrote, "After only one screening in Venice, Fight
Club is shaping up to be the most contentious mainstream Hollywood meditation
on violence since Stanley Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange."[61]

Janet Maslin of The New York Times praised Fincher's direction and editing of
the film. She also noted that Fight Club carried a message of "contemporary
manhood", and that, if not watched closely, the film could be misconstrued as
an endorsement of violence and nihilism.[62] Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-
Times called Fight Club "visceral and hard-edged", as well as "a thrill ride
masquerading as philosophy" that most audiences would not appreciate.[63]
Ebert later acknowledged that the film was "beloved by most, not by me".[64]
Jay Carr of The Boston Globe thought that the film began with an
"invigoratingly nervy and imaginative buzz", but that it eventually became
"explosively silly".[65] David Ansen of Newsweek described Fight Club as "an
outrageous mixture of brilliant technique, puerile philosophizing, trenchant
satire and sensory overload" and thought that the ending was too
pretentious.[66]

Richard Schickel of Time described the director's mise en scÃ¨ne as dark and
damp, noting, "It enforces the contrast between the sterilities of his
characters' aboveground life and their underground one. Water, even when it's
polluted, is the source of life; blood, even when it's carelessly spilled, is
the symbol of life being fully lived. To put his point simply: it's better to
be wet than dry." Schickel applauded the performances of Brad Pitt and Edward
Norton, but he criticized the film's "conventionally gimmicky" unfolding and
the failure to make Helena Bonham Carter's character interesting.[67]

Fight Club was nominated for the 2000 Academy Award for Sound Editing for Best
Sound Editing, but it lost to The Matrix (1999).[68] Actress Helena Bonham
Carter won the 2000 Empire Award for Best British Actress.[69] The Online Film
Critics Society also nominated Fight Club for Best Film, Best Director, Best
Actor (Edward Norton), Best Editing, and Best Adapted Screenplay (Uhls).[70]
Though the film won none of the awards, the society listed Fight Club as one
of the top ten films of 1999.[71] The soundtrack for Fight Club received a
nomination for a BRIT Award, which it lost to Notting Hill.[72]

## [edit] Cultural impact

Tyler Durden's recitation of the rules of fight club is considered one of the
most quoted monologues in cinema:[73]  

    The first rule of fight club is... you do not talk about fight club.
    The second rule of fight club is... you do not talk about fight club.
    Third rule of fight club, someone yells "Stop!", goes limp, taps out, the fight is over.
    Fourth rule, only two guys to a fight.
    Fifth rule, one fight at a time, fellas.
    Sixth rule, no shirts, no shoes.
    Seventh rule, fights will go on as long as they have to.
    And the eighth and final rule, if this is your first night at fight club, you have to fight.  
Fight Club was considered one of the most controversial and talked-about films
of 1999.[21][74] The film was perceived as the forerunner of a new mood in
American political life. Like other 1999 films Magnolia, Being John Malkovich,
and Three Kings, Fight Club was recognized as an innovator in cinematic form
and style due to its exploitation of new developments in filmmaking
technology.[75] Following its initial release, Fight Club grew in popularity
via word of mouth,[76] and the positive reception of the DVD established it as
a cult film that Newsweek conjectured would enjoy "perennial" fame.[77][78]
The success of the film also propelled the novel's author Chuck Palahniuk to
global renown.[79]

The film is often credited as having spawned fight clubs in America, however,
according to Chuck Palahniuk, similar clubs and events already existed before
the film's release and were part of the inspiration for the novel. A
"Gentleman's Fight Club" was started in Menlo Park, California in 2000 and has
members mostly from the high tech industry.[80] Teens and preteens in Texas,
New Jersey, Washington state, and Alaska also initiated fight clubs and posted
videos of their fights online, leading authorities to break up the clubs. In
2006, an unwilling participant from a local high school was injured at a fight
club in Arlington, Texas, and the DVD sales of the fight led to the arrest of
six teenagers.[81] An unsanctioned fight club was also started at Princeton
University, and matches were held on campus.[82]

According to actor Edward Norton, one of his former professors from Yale
University has reported being inundated with dissertations about Fight
Club.[76] The film has also been used as an academic tool to introduce college
students to rhetorical analysis and argumentation.[83]

In 2004 and 2006, Fight Club was voted by Empire readers as the ninth and
eighth greatest film of all time, respectively,[84][85] while Total Film
ranked Fight Club as "The Greatest Film of our Lifetime" in 2007 during the
magazine's tenth anniversary.[86] In 2007, Premiere selected Tyler Durden's
line, "The first rule of fight club is you do not talk about fight club," as
the 27th greatest movie line of all time.[87] In 2008, UK readers of Empire
ranked Tyler Durden as #1 in a list of 100 Greatest Movie Characters.[88]

## [edit] References

  * Linson, Art (May 2002). "Fight Clubbed". What Just Happened? Bitter Hollywood Tales from the Front Line. Bloomsbury USA. pp. 141-156. ISBN 1582342407.
  * Waxman, Sharon (December 2005). Rebels on the Backlot: Six Maverick Directors and How They Conquered the Hollywood Studio System. HarperEntertainment. ISBN 0060540176.

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b c d Waxman, pp. 137â151.
  2. ^ Fleming, Michael (August 19, 1997). "Thornton holds reins of 'Horses'". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1116678264.html?categoryid=3&cs=1. Retrieved on March 23, 2007.
  3. ^ a b c d e Waxman, pp. 175â184.
  4. ^ Biskind, Peter (August 1999). "Extreme Norton". Vanity Fair.
  5. ^ Petrikin, Chris (January 7, 1998). "Studio Report Card: Fox". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117434297.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on March 23, 2007.
  6. ^ "Palahniuk: Marketing 'Fight Club' is 'the ultimate absurd joke'". CNN. October 29, 1999. http://www.cnn.com/books/news/9910/29/fight.club.author/. Retrieved on March 26, 2007.
  7. ^ Johnson, Richard (November 1999). "Boxing Helena". Los Angeles Magazine.
  8. ^ a b c d Garrett, Stephen (July 1999). "Freeze Frame". Details.
  9. ^ Schneller, Johanna (August 1999). "Brad Pitt and Edward Norton make 'Fight Club'". Premiere.
  10. ^ Nashawaty, Chris (July 16, 1998). "Brad Pitt loses his teeth for a "Fight"". Entertainment Weekly. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,83604,00.html. Retrieved on March 23, 2007.
  11. ^ a b c d e f g Smith, Gavin (September/October 1999). "Gavin Smith goes one-on-one with David Fincher". Film Comment.
  12. ^ "100 DVDs You Must Own". Empire: 31. January 2003.
  13. ^ "Interview With Fight Club Author Chuck Palahniuk". DVD Talk. http://www.dvdtalk.com/fightclub.html. Retrieved on March 23, 2007.
  14. ^ Hobson, Louis B. (October 10, 1999). "Fiction for real". Calgary Sun.
  15. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Fight Club DVD commentary featuring David Fincher, Brad Pitt, Edward Norton and Helena Bonham Carter, [2000], 20th Century Fox.
  16. ^ Schaefer, Stephen (October 13, 1999). "Fight Club's Controversial Cut". MrShowbiz.com. http://web.archive.org/web/20010416022913/mrshowbiz.go.com/news/Todays_Stories/991013/fightclubauthor101399.html. Retrieved on December 2, 2007.
  17. ^ a b c d Wise, Damon (December 1999). "Menace II Society". Empire.
  18. ^ a b c d Teasdall, Barbara (1999). "Edward Norton Fights His Way to the Top". Reel.com (Movie Gallery). http://www.reel.com/reel.asp?node=features/interviews/norton. Retrieved on March 24, 2007.
  19. ^ Waxman, pp. 199â202.
  20. ^ a b c d e Probst, Christopher (November 1999). "Anarchy in the U.S.A". American Cinematographer. http://www.theasc.com/magazine/nov99/anarchy/index.htm. Retrieved on March 23, 2007.
  21. ^ a b c d "'Club' fighting for a respectful place in life". Post-Tribune. March 15, 2001.
  22. ^ "It Bruiser: Julie Pearce". Entertainment Weekly. July 25, 1999.
  23. ^ Covert, Colin (March 29, 2002). "Fear factor is Fincher's forte". Star Tribune.
  24. ^ a b c d e Martin, Kevin H. (January 2000). "A World of Hurt". Cinefex.
  25. ^ Frauenfelder, Mark (August 1999). "Hollywood's Head Case". Wired.
  26. ^ Schurr, Amanda (November 19, 1999). "Score one for musicians turned film composers". Sarasota Herald-Tribune.
  27. ^ a b c d Schaefer, Stephen (October 1999). "Brad Pitt & Edward Norton". MrShowbiz.com. http://web.archive.org/web/20010417125217/http://mrshowbiz.go.com/celebrities/interviews/509_1.html. Retrieved on March 26, 2007.
  28. ^ a b O'Connor, Robby (October 8, 1999). "Interview with Edward Norton". Yale Herald.
  29. ^ a b Hobson, Louis B. (October 10, 1999). "Get ready to rumble". Calgary Sun.
  30. ^ Slotek, Jim (October 10, 1999). "Cruisin' for a bruisin'". Toronto Sun.
  31. ^ Moses, Michael (1999). "Fighting Words: An interview with Fight Club director David Fincher". DrDrew.com. Dr. Drew. http://www.drdrew.com/article.asp?id=198.
  32. ^ a b c Fuller, Graham (November 1999). "Fighting Talk". Interview 24 (5): 1071â7. doi:10.1053/jhsu.1999.1281. PMID 10509287. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1285/is_11_29/ai_57590231.
  33. ^ Sragow, Michael (October 14, 1999). "Testosterama". Salon.com. http://www.salon.com/ent/col/srag/1999/10/14/fincher/index1.html. Retrieved on December 2, 2007.
  34. ^ Said, S.F. (April 19, 2003). "It's the thought that counts". The Daily Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/arts/main.jhtml?xml=%2Farts%2F2003%2F04%2F19%2Fbfnort.xml. Retrieved on April 30, 2008.
  35. ^ a b Waxman, pp. 253â273.
  36. ^ Linson, pp. 152.
  37. ^ Svetkey, Benjamin (October 15, 1999). "Blood, Sweat, and Fears". Entertainment Weekly. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,271117,00.html. Retrieved on April 30, 2008.
  38. ^ Klady, Leonard (June 17, 1999). "Fox holds the 'Fight' to fall". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117503196.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on March 23, 2007.
  39. ^ Goodwin, Christopher (September 19, 1999). "The malaise of the American male". The Sunday Times.
  40. ^ a b c Linson, pp. 155.
  41. ^ Basoli, A. G. (September 18, 1999). "The Venice Diaries". indieWIRE.com. indieWIRE. http://www.indiewire.com/ots/fes_99Venice_990918_diary3.html. Retrieved on November 14, 2006.
  42. ^ Orwall, Bruce (October 25, 1999). "L.A. Confidential: Studios Move to Put A Halt on Issuing Box-Office Estimates". Wall Street Journal.
  43. ^ a b "Fight Club (1999)". Box Office Mojo. Box Office Mojo, LLC. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?page=main&id=fightclub.htm. Retrieved on November 14, 2006.
  44. ^ "Weekend Box Office Results for October 15-17, 1999". Box Office Mojo. Box Office Mojo, LLC. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/weekend/chart/?yr=1999&wknd=42&p=.htm. Retrieved on November 14, 2006.
  45. ^ Hayes, Dade (October 18, 1999). "'Jeopardy' just barely". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117756713.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on March 23, 20072007-03-23.
  46. ^ "Weekend Box Office Results for October 22-24, 1999". Box Office Mojo. Box Office Mojo, LLC. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/weekend/chart/?view=&yr=1999&wknd=43&p=.htm. Retrieved on November 14, 2006.
  47. ^ Lyman, Rick (June 26, 2000). "MEDIA TALK; Changes at Fox Studio End Pax Hollywood". The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=F00616FB3E540C758EDDAF0894D8404482. Retrieved on February 24, 2007.
  48. ^ Dawtrey, Adam (November 9, 1999). "UK to cut 'Club'". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117757863.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on March 23, 2007.
  49. ^ French, Philip (March 4, 2007). "Fight Club". The Observer. http://observer.guardian.co.uk/screen/story/0,,2025992,00.html. Retrieved on March 30, 2007.
  50. ^ Kirsner, Scott (April 23, 2007). "How DVDs became a success". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117963617.html?categoryid=20&cs=1. Retrieved on April 28, 2007.
  51. ^ a b Misek, Marla (November 2001). "For Fight Club and Seven, package makes perfect". EMedia Magazine 14 (11): 27â28.
  52. ^ "Fight Club". foxstore.com. 20th Century Fox. http://www.foxstore.com/detail?item=105. Retrieved on March 23, 2007.
  53. ^ "Fight Club Special Edition". foxstore.com. 20th Century Fox. http://www.foxstore.com/detail?item=986. Retrieved on March 23, 2007.
  54. ^ Wilson, Wendy (June 12, 2000). "Fox's Fight Club delivers knockout package, promo". Video Business.
  55. ^ "The OFCS 2000 Year End Awards". Online Film Critics Society. Rotten Tomatoes. http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com/pages/awards/2000awards. Retrieved on March 23, 2007.
  56. ^ "The 50 Essential DVDs". Entertainment Weekly. January 19, 2001. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,279415,00.html. Retrieved on March 23, 2007.
  57. ^ Cole, Ron (February 14, 2004). "Don't let Kurt Russell classic escape you". Battle Creek Enquirer (Gannett Company).
  58. ^ Bing, Jonathan (April 11, 2001). "'Fight Club' author books pair of deals". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117796888.html?categoryid=21&cs=1. Retrieved on May 1, 2007.
  59. ^ Christopher, James (September 13, 2001). "How was it for you?". The Times.
  60. ^ Gritten, David (September 14, 1999). "Premiere of Fight Club leaves critics slugging it out in Venice". The Ottawa Citizen.
  61. ^ Goodwin, Christopher (September 24, 1999). "The beaten generation". The Australian.
  62. ^ Maslin, Janet (October 15, 1999). "Film Review; Such a Very Long Way From Duvets to Danger". The New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9506E1DE1030F936A25753C1A96F958260. Retrieved on April 30, 2008.
  63. ^ Ebert, Roger (October 15, 1999). "Fight Club". Chicago Sun-Times. http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/19991015/REVIEWS/910150302/1023. Retrieved on March 23, 2007.
  64. ^ Ebert, Roger (August 24, 2007). "Zodiac". Chicago Sun-Times. http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20070823/REVIEWS/708230308/-1/REVIEWS01. Retrieved on April 30, 2008.
  65. ^ Carr, Jay (October 15, 1999). "'Fight Club' packs a punch but lacks stamina". Boston Globe.
  66. ^ Ansen, David (October 18, 1999). "A Fistful of Darkness". Newsweek.
  67. ^ Schickel, Richard (October 11, 1999). "Conditional Knockout". Time. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,992235,00.html. Retrieved on January 7, 2008.
  68. ^ "72nd Academy Awards (1999)". Academy Awards Database. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. http://awardsdatabase.oscars.org/ampas_awards/DisplayMain.jsp?curTime=1174774613148. Retrieved on March 24, 2007.
  69. ^ "Sony Ericsson Empire Awards - 2000 Winners". Empire. http://www.empireonline.com/awards2006/previouswinners/2000.asp. Retrieved on March 23, 2007.
  70. ^ "1999 Year-End Award Nominees". Online Film Critics Society. Rotten Tomatoes. http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com/pages/awards/99nominees. Retrieved on April 28, 2007.
  71. ^ "The OFCS 1999 Year End Awards". Online Film Critics Society. Rotten Tomatoes. http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com/pages/awards/99awards. Retrieved on April 28, 2007.
  72. ^ "Brits 2000: The winners". BBC News Online (BBC News). March 3, 2000. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/in_depth/entertainment/2000/brit_awards/625884.stm. Retrieved on April 16, 2007.
  73. ^ "Shoot to Thrill: The stunning psychological thrillers that made David Fincher one of Hollywood's hottest directors". The Mail on Sunday. May 6, 2007.
  74. ^ "'Fight Club' author Palahniuk to participate in academic conference at Edinboro University". Erie Times-News. March 26, 2001.
  75. ^ Pulver, Andrew (November 27, 2004). "Adaptation of the week No. 36 Fight Club (1999)". The Guardian. http://film.guardian.co.uk/adaptation/story/0,12830,1360434,00.html. Retrieved on June 23, 2008.
  76. ^ a b Wise, Damon (November 2, 2000). "Now you see it". The Guardian. http://film.guardian.co.uk/features/featurepages/0,,391523,00.html. Retrieved on April 30, 2008.
  77. ^ Nick Nunziata (March 23, 2004). "The personality of cult". CNN. http://edition.cnn.com/2004/SHOWBIZ/Movies/03/23/cult.films/. Retrieved on April 1, 2007.
  78. ^ Ansen, David (July 11, 2005). "Is Anybody Making Movies We'll Actually Watch In 50 Years?". Newsweek.
  79. ^ Flynn, Bob (March 29, 2007). "Fighting talk". The Independent.
  80. ^ Associated Press (May 29, 2006). "Fight club draws techies for bloody underground beatdowns". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/2006-05-29-fight-club_x.htm. Retrieved on April 28, 2007.
  81. ^ Rosenstein, Bruce (August 1, 2006). "Illegal, violent teen fight clubs face police crackdown". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2006-07-31-violent-fight-clubs_x.htm. Retrieved on April 28, 2007.
  82. ^ "At Princeton, no punches pulled". The Philadelphia Inquirer. June 6, 2001.
  83. ^ Duin, Julia (May 9, 2002). "Pop degrees". The Washington Times.
  84. ^ "The 100 Greatest Movies Of All Time". Empire: 96. 2004-01-30.
  85. ^ "The 201 Greatest Movies Of All Time". Empire: 98. January 2006.
  86. ^ "Ten Greatest Films of the Past Decade". Total Film: 98. April 2007.
  87. ^ "The 100 Greatest Movie Lines". Premiere. http://www.premiere.com/gallery.aspx?section_id=66&webtrends_section=best&article_id=3713&section_prefix=best&window_id=1&gallery_id=298&page_number=1&seq=74&cnt=76. Retrieved on April 26, 2007.
  88. ^ "The 100 Greatest Movie Characters - 1. Tyler Durden". Empire. http://www.empireonline.com/100-greatest-movie-characters/default.asp?c=1. Retrieved on December 1, 2008.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Read Mercer Schuchardt, ed (September 2008). You Do Not Talk About Fight Club: I Am Jack's Completely Unauthorized Essay Collection. Benbella Books. ISBN 1933771526.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Fight Club
(film)  
  * Official site
  * Fight Club at the Internet Movie Database
  * Fight Club at Rotten Tomatoes
  * Fight Club at Box Office Mojo
  * Fight Club at Allmovie
  * Fight Club at Metacritic
  * Anarchy in the USA at American Cinematographer
  * doppelganger: exploded states of consciousness in fight club at Disinfo
  * Fight Club : A Ritual Cure For The Spiritual Ailment Of American Masculinity
  * Masculine Identity in the Service Class: An Analysis of Fight Club
  * Script at IMSDB

Preceded by  
The Straight Story Box office number-one films of 1999 (USA)  
October 17, 1999 Succeeded by  
The Best Man  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Films directed by David Fincher  
1990s

Alien 3 (1992) â¢ Seven (1995) â¢ The Game (1997) â¢ Fight Club (1999)  
2000s

Panic Room (2002) â¢ Zodiac (2007) â¢ The Curious Case of Benjamin Button
(2008)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fight_Club_(film)"

Categories: English-language films | 1999 films | American films | Anti-
modernist films | Black comedy films | Fiction with unreliable narrators |
Fight Club | Films based on novels | Films directed by David Fincher | Films
shot in Super 35 | Satirical films | Metafictional works

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * Latina
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 23:30.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



