
# David Cronenberg

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

David Cronenberg  
<IMG>  
David Cronenberg at Cannes 2002  
Born David Paul Cronenberg  
March 15, 1943 (1943-03-15) (age 66)  
Toronto, Ontario, Canada  
Other name(s) Dave Deprave  
Baron of Blood  
Occupation Director, Producer, Writer, and Actor  
Years active 1966 â present  
Spouse(s) Margaret Hindson (1970â1977)  
Caroline Zeifman (1979â)  
David Paul Cronenberg, OC, FRSC (born March 15, 1943)[1] is a Canadian
filmmaker, screenwriter, and occasional actor. He is one of the principal
originators of what is commonly known as the body horror or venereal horror
genre. This style of filmmaking explores people's fears of bodily
transformation and infection. In his films, the psychological is typically
intertwined with the physical. In the first half of his career, he explored
these themes mostly through horror and science fiction, although his work has
since expanded beyond these genres.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
    * 1.1 Early life
    * 1.2 Career
    * 1.3 Honors
  * 2 Filmography as director
    * 2.1 Feature films
    * 2.2 Short films
    * 2.3 Television series
    * 2.4 Television spots
    * 2.5 Commercials
  * 3 Filmography as producer
  * 4 Filmography as actor
  * 5 Further reading
  * 6 Bibliographies
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

### [edit] Early life

Cronenberg was born in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, where he currently lives. He
is the son of Esther (nÃ©e Sumberg), a musician, and Milton Cronenberg, a
writer and editor.[1] He was raised in a middle-class secular Jewish
family,[2][3][4] and remained an atheist.[5] Cronenberg attended Harbord
Collegiate Institute, later graduating from the University of Toronto with a
degree in literature, having switched from science. He has cited William S.
Burroughs and Vladimir Nabokov as influences.

### [edit] Career

After two short sketch films and two short art-house features (the black and
white Stereo and the colour Crimes of the Future) Cronenberg went into
partnership with Ivan Reitman. The Canadian government provided financing for
Cronenberg's films through the 1970s. Cronenberg alternated his signature
"body horror" films such as Shivers with projects reflecting his interest in
car racing and bike gangs. Rabid exploited the unexpected acting talents of
porn queen Marilyn Chambers (Cronenberg's first choice was a young, then-
unknown Sissy Spacek). Rabid was a breakthrough with international
distributors and his next two horror features gained stronger support.

Over the arc of his career, Cronenberg's films follow a definite progression,
a movement from the social world to the inner life. In his early films,
scientists modify human bodies, which results in the breakdown of social order
(e.g. Shivers, Rabid). In his middle period, the chaos wrought by the
scientist is more personal, (e.g. The Brood, Scanners, Videodrome). In the
later period, the scientist himself is altered by his experiment (e.g.
Cronenberg's remake of The Fly). This trajectory culminates in Dead Ringers in
which a twin pair of gynecologists spiral into codependency and drug
addiction. Cronenberg's later films tend more to the psychological, often
contrasting subjective and objective realities (eXistenZ, M. Butterfly,
Spider). Perhaps the best example of a film that straddles the line between
his works of personal chaos and psychological confusion is Cronenberg's
"adaptation" of his literary hero Burroughs' most controversial book, Naked
Lunch. The book itself (widely accepted as Burroughs' seminal work) was
considered "unfilmable" and Cronenberg acknowledged that a straight
translation of the book to film would "cost 100 million dollars and be banned
in every country in the world". Instead, Cronenbergâmuch like in his earlier
film, Videodromeâconsistently blurred the lines between what appeared to be
reality and what appeared to be hallucinations brought on by the main
character's drug addiction. Some of the book's "moments" (as well as incidents
loosely based upon Burroughs' life) are presented in this manner within the
film. Cronenberg stated that while writing the screenplay for Naked Lunch, he
felt a moment of synergy with the writing style of William S. Burroughs. He
felt the connection between his screenwriting style and Burroughs' prose style
was so strong, that he jokingly remarked that should Burroughs pass on, "I'll
just write his next book".

Cronenberg has said that his films should be seen "from the point of view of
the disease", and that, for example, he identifies with the characters in
Shivers after they become infected with the anarchic parasites. Disease and
disaster, in Cronenberg's work, are less problems to be overcome than agents
of personal transformation. Similarly, in Crash (1996), people who have been
injured in car crashes attempt to view their ordeal as "a fertilising rather
than a destructive event". In 2006, Cronenberg would say that he was upset
that Paul Haggis had chosen the same name for his Academy Award winning film
Crash, feeling it was not only ethically wrong, but annoying as hell.[citation
needed]

Aside from The Dead Zone (1983) and The Fly, Cronenberg has not generally
worked within the world of big-budget, mainstream Hollywood filmmaking,
although he has had occasional near misses. At one stage he was considered by
George Lucas as a possible director for Return of the Jedi but was passed.
Cronenberg also worked for nearly a year on a version of Total Recall but
experienced "creative differences" with producers Dino De Laurentiis and
Ronald Shusett. A different version of the film was eventually made by Paul
Verhoeven. A fan of Philip K. Dick, the author of the short story (We Can
Remember it For You Wholesale) upon which Total Recall was based, Cronenberg
related (in the biography/overview of his work, Cronenberg on Cronenberg) that
his dissatisfaction with what he envisioned the film to be and what it ended
up being pained him so greatly that for a time, he suffered a migraine just
thinking about it, akin to a needle piercing his eye.

In the late 1990s, Cronenberg was announced as director of a sequel to another
Verhoeven film, Basic Instinct, but this also fell through. His recent work,
the thriller A History of Violence (2005), is one of his highest budgeted and
most mass audience-accessible to date. He has said that the decision to direct
it was influenced by his having had to defer some of his salary on the low-
budgeted Spider, but it is one of his most critically acclaimed films to date,
along with Eastern Promises (2007) which is about the struggle one man went
through to gain power in the Russian Mafia.

Cronenberg has hired Howard Shore to compose the soundtrack to nearly all of
his films (see List of noted film director and composer collaborations). Other
regular collaborators include actor Robert Silverman, art director Carol
Spier, sound editor Bryan Day, film editor Ronald Sanders, his sister, costume
designer Denise Cronenberg, and, from 1979 until 1988, cinematographer Mark
Irwin. In 2008, Cronenberg directed Howard Shore's first opera, The Fly.

Since 1988's Dead Ringers, Cronenberg has worked with cinematographer Peter
Suschitzky on each of his films (see List of noted film director and
cinematographer collaborations). Suschitzky was the director of photography
for Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back, and Cronenberg has
repeatedly said that Suschitzky's work in that film made it the most beautiful
sci-fi film he had ever seen, which was a motivating factor to work with him
on Dead Ringers.

Having worked with an impressive list of Hollywood stars, Cronenberg says that
he didn't get to make a film with an actor he wanted to work with for a long
time, Burt Reynolds. Coupled with the loyalty he shows to his key personnel,
Cronenberg remains a staunchly Canadian filmmaker, with nearly all of his
films (including major studio vehicles The Dead Zone and The Fly) having been
filmed in his home province Ontario. Notable exceptions include M. Butterfly
and Spider, most of which were shot in China and England, respectively. Also,
Rabid and Shivers were shot in and around Montreal. Most of his films have
been at least partially financed by Telefilm Canada, and Cronenberg is a vocal
supporter of government-backed film projects, saying "Every country needs [a
system of government grants] in order to have a national cinema in the face of
Hollywood".[6]

Cronenberg has also appeared in the films of other directors as an actor. Most
of his roles are cameo appearances, as in Into The Night, Jason X, To Die For,
and Alias, but on occasion he has played major roles, as in Nightbreed or Last
Night. He has not played major roles in any of his own films, but he did put
in a brief appearance as a gynecologist in The Fly; he can also be glimpsed
among the sex-crazed hordes in Shivers; he can be heard as an unseen car-pound
attendant in Crash; his hands can be glimpsed in eXistenZ; and he appeared as
a stand-in for James Woods in Videodrome for shots in which Woods' character
wore a helmet that covered his head. In the year 2008 Cronenberg realized two
extra-cinematographic projects: the exhibition Chromosomes at the Rome Film
Fest and the opera "The Fly" at the LaOpera in Los Angeles and Theatre
ChÃ¢telet in Paris. He is currently set to direct the film version of The
Matarese Circle with Denzel Washington and Tom Cruise.

### [edit] Honors

In 1999, Cronenberg was inducted onto Canada's Walk of Fame.[7] In 2002, he
was made an Officer of the Order of Canada, and in 2006 he was awarded the
Cannes Film Festival's lifetime achievement award, the Carrosse d'Or.[8] Two
of his films, Dead Ringers and Spider, were voted for in the 2002 Sight and
Sound Poll.[9]

Cronenberg has appeared on various "Greatest Director" lists. In 2004, Science
Fiction magazine Strange Horizons named him the 2nd greatest director in the
history of the genre, ahead of better known directors such as Steven
Spielberg, James Cameron, Jean-Luc Godard and Ridley Scott.[10] In the same
year, The Guardian listed him 9th on their list of "The world's 40 best
directors".[11] In addition, in 2007, Total Film named him as the 17th
greatest director of all-time.[12]

In 2006, he was made a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, the senior
national body of distinguished Canadian scientists and scholars.[13]

In 2009 Cronenberg received the LÃ©gion d'honneur from the government of
France. [2]

## [edit] Filmography as director

### [edit] Feature films

  * Stereo (1969)
  * Crimes of the Future (1970)
  * Shivers (1975)
  * Rabid (1977)
  * Fast Company (1979)
  * The Brood (1979)
  * Scanners (1981)
  * Videodrome (1983)
  * The Dead Zone (1983)
  * The Fly (1986)
  * Dead Ringers (1988)
  * Naked Lunch (1991)
  * M. Butterfly (1993)
  * Crash (1996)
  * eXistenZ (1999)
  * Spider (2002)
  * A History of Violence (2005)
  * Eastern Promises (2007)

### [edit] Short films

  * Transfer (1966)
  * From the Drain (1967)
  * Secret Weapons (1972)
  * The Victim (1975)
  * The Lie Chair (1975)
  * The Italian Machine (1976) watch it here (RealMedia)
  * Camera (2000)
  * To Each His Own Cinema (Chacun son cinÃ©ma) (2007) 
    * segment: At the Suicide of the Last Jew in the World in the Last Cinema in the World

### [edit] Television series

  * Friday the 13th: The Series
    * episode: 1.12 Faith Healer (1987)
  * Scales of Justice
    * episodes: Regina vs Horvath (1990) & Regina vs Logan (1990)

### [edit] Television spots

  * Jim Ritchie Sculptor (1971)
  * Letter from Michelangelo (1971)
  * Tourettes (1971)
  * Don Valley (1972)
  * Fort York (1972)
  * Lakeshore (1972)
  * Winter Garden (1972)
  * Scarborough Bluffs (1972)
  * In the Dirt (1972)

### [edit] Commercials

  * Hydro
    * Client: Ontario Hydro
    * Product: Energy conservation
    * Agency: Burghardt Wolowich Crunkhorn
    * Production company: The Partners' Film Company Ltd.
    * Format: 4 x 30-second commercials
    * Titles: Hot Showers, Laundry, Cleaners, Timers

  * Caramilk
    * Client: William Neilson Ltd.
    * Product: Cadbury Caramilk
    * Agency: Scali McCabe, Sloves (Canada) Ltd.
    * Production company: The Partners' Film Company Ltd.
    * Format: 2 x 30-second commercials
    * Titles: Bistro, Surveillance

  * Nike
    * Client: Nike International
    * Product: Nike Air 180
    * Agency: Wieden and Kennedy
    * Production company: The Partners' Film Company Ltd.
    * Format: 1 x 15-second/4 x 30-second commercials
    * Title: Transformation

  
## [edit] Filmography as producer

  * Dead Ringers (1988)
  * Crash (1996)
  * I'm Losing You (1998)
  * Drone (2008)

## [edit] Filmography as actor

  * Into the Night (1985)
  * The Fly (1986, cameo)
  * Nightbreed (1990)
  * To Die For (1995, cameo)
  * Blood and Donuts (1995)
  * The Stupids (1996, cameo)
  * Extreme Measures (1996, cameo)
  * Last Night (1998)
  * Resurrection (1999)
  * Jason X (2001)
  * Alias (TV) (2003) (Episodes "Remnants" and "Conscious")

## [edit] Further reading

  * Mark Browning (2007): David Cronenberg: Author or Filmmaker? (ISBN 9781841501734)
  * Thomas J. Dreibrodt (2000): Lang lebe das neue Fleisch. Die Filme von David Cronenberg â von 'Shivers' bis 'eXistenZ'. (academic; in German) (ISBN 3-932872-05-3)
  * Serge GrÃ¼nberg, ed. (2006): David Cronenberg (interviews) (ISBN 0-85965-376-5)
  * Piers Handling (1983): The Shape of Rage: The Films of David Cronenberg (ISBN 0-7736-1137-1)
  * Kim Newman (1989): Nightmare Movies: A Critical History of the Horror Film 1968â1988 (ISBN 0-517-57366-0)
  * Drehli Robnik, Michael Palm, eds. (1992): Und das Wort ist Fleisch geworden. Texte Ã¼ber Filme von David Cronenberg. Vienna, PVS: 1992. ISBN 3-901196-02-1
  * Chris Rodley, ed. (1996): Cronenberg on Cronenberg (ISBN 0-571-19137-1)

## [edit] Bibliographies

  * David Cronenberg Bibliography (via UC Berkeley)
  * Red Cars Artist's book David Cronenberg, Volumina (2005)

## [edit] References

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: David Cronenberg  
  1. ^ a b David Cronenberg Biography (1943â)
  2. ^ New York's Premier Alternative Newspaper. Arts, Music, Food, Movies and Opinion
  3. ^ The Film Reference Library
  4. ^ David Cronenberg Georgia Straight
  5. ^ Guttsman, Janet, Reuters.com (September 10, 2007). Cronenberg gets down and dirty with Russian mob
  6. ^ David Cronenberg | The A.V. Club
  7. ^ Canada's Walk of Fame: David Cronenberg, film director, Cannes Film Festival winner
  8. ^ [1][dead link]
  9. ^ BFI | Sight & Sound | Top Ten Poll 2002 â Directors' films
  10. ^ http://www.strangehorizons.com/2004/20040419/directors.shtml
  11. ^ http://film.guardian.co.uk/features/page/0,11456,1082823,00.html
  12. ^ http://www.totalfilm.com/features/the_greatest_directors_ever_-_part_2
  13. ^ Rsc Src

005)

## [edit] External links

  * David Cronenberg at the Internet Movie Database
  * David Cronenberg at Northern Stars
  * Senses of Cinema: Great Directors Critical Database
  * An article on Salon.com
  * An interview, circa 1999
  * Director's statement by David Cronenberg on 'Stereo' and 'Crimes of the Future', 2005
  * Canadian Film Encyclopedia (A publication of The Film Reference Library/A division of the Toronto International Film Festival Group)
  * BBC interview with Cronenberg (Video, 19 October 2007)
  * Interview with Cronenberg by SBIFF at UCSB regarding his life, work and Eastern Promises

v â¢ d â¢ e

The Scanners Series  
Films

Scanners Series â¢ Scanners II: The New Order â¢ Scanners III: The Takeover

<IMG>  
Spin-Off Films

Scanner Cop â¢ Scanners: The Showdown  
Related Topic

David Cronenberg  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Films by David Cronenberg  
1960s

Stereo (1969)  
1970s

Crimes of the Future (1970) Â· Shivers (1975) Â· Rabid (1977) Â· Fast Company
(1979) Â· The Brood (1979)  
1980s

Scanners (1981) Â· Videodrome (1983) Â· The Dead Zone (1983) Â· The Fly (1986)
Â· Dead Ringers (1988)  
1990s

Naked Lunch (1991) Â· M. Butterfly (1993) Â· Crash (1996) Â· eXistenZ (1999)  
2000s

Spider (2002) Â· A History of Violence (2005) Â· Eastern Promises (2007)  
Shorts

Transfer (1966) Â· From the Drain (1967) Â· Camera (2000) Â· To Each His Own
Cinema (2007)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Cronenberg"

Categories: 1943 births | Canadian atheists | Canadian film actors | Canadian
film directors | Canadian Jews | Jewish atheists | Fellows of the Royal
Society of Canada | Genie Award winners for Best Achievement in Direction |
Genie Award winners for Best Adapted Screenplay | LÃ©gion d'honneur recipients
| Jewish actors | Officers of the Order of Canada | People from Toronto |
University of Toronto alumni | Living people

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since March 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 11:47.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



