
# Lightsaber

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Two lightsabers.

The lightsaber is a science fiction weapon with a key role in the Star Wars
movies and in the novels, games and other forms of media that constitute the
Expanded Universe. The lightsaber is a sword with a column of brightly colored
energy in the place of a metal blade. Its distinct appearance was created
using rotoscoping for the original trilogy, and digitally for the prequel
trilogy. The lightsaber first appeared in Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope
(1977), and in 2008 a survey of approximately two thousand film fans found it
to be the most popular film weapon.[1]

The lightsaber hilt is a polished metal grip that can project a blade about
one meter long. The blade cuts through most substances without resistance,
leaves cauterized wounds in flesh, but is deflected by another lightsaber
blade and energy shield/wall. An active lightsaber gives off a distinctive
hum, which rises in pitch and volume as the blade is moved rapidly through the
air, and bringing the blade into contact with an object or another lightsaber
blade produces a loud crackle. The lightsaber is the signature weapon of the
Jedi order and their Sith counterparts, both of whom can use them to deflect
blaster bolts. Every Star Wars movie features at least one lightsaber duel.

The name "lightsaber" is often used to describe other similar weapons that
appear in science fiction.

## Contents

  * 1 Production
  * 2 Visual effects
    * 2.1 Sound
    * 2.2 Prop construction
  * 3 Depiction
    * 3.1 Types
    * 3.2 Colors
    * 3.3 Choreography
  * 4 Appearances in popular culture
  * 5 Replicas
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Production

## [edit] Visual effects

Nelson Shin, renowned South Korean animator, was tasked with drawing the
lightsaber to match the film scenes that the film producers brought. Shin
explained to the people from Lucasfilm that since the lightsaber is made of
light, the sword should look "a little shaky" like a fluorescent tube. He
suggested inserting one frame that was much lighter than the others while
printing the film on an optical printer, making the light seem to vibrate.
Shin also recommended adding a degausser sound on top of the other sounds for
the weapon since the sound would be reminiscent of a magnetic field. The whole
process took one week, surprising his company, and Lucasfilm demonstrated the
film to him, having followed his suggestions, including using an X-Acto knife
to give the lightsaber a very sharp look.[2]

### [edit] Sound

The lightsaber sound effect was developed by sound designer Ben Burtt as a
combination of the hum of idling interlock motors in aged movie projectors and
interference caused by a television set on an unshielded microphone. Burtt
discovered the latter accidentally as he was looking for a buzzing, sparkling
sound to add to the projector motor hum.[3]

The pitch changes of lightsaber movement were produced by playing the basic
lightsaber tone on a speaker and recording it on a moving microphone,
generating Doppler shift to mimic a moving sound source.[3]

### [edit] Prop construction

For A New Hope, the original film prop hilts were constructed from old camera-
flash battery packs and other pieces of hardware. The "switched-on" sword
props were designed with the intention of creating an "in-camera" glowing
effect. The "blade" was three-sided and coated with a retroreflector
arrayâthe same sort used for highway signs. A lamp was positioned to the
side of the taking camera and reflected towards the subject through 45-degree
angled glass so that the sword would appear to glow from the camera's point-
of-view.

## [edit] Depiction

Lightsabers were present in the earliest drafts as mundane laser weapons that
were used alongside laser guns.[4][5] The introduction of the Force in a later
revision made the Jedi and the Sith supernaturally skilled, eventually the
only swordsmen. The lightsaber became the Force-user's tool, "...not as clumsy
or random as a blaster. An elegant weapon, for a more civilized age."[6]

### [edit] Types

Lightsabers can be wielded as either one-handed or two-handed weapons. The
Phantom Menace introduced a double-bladed lightsaber with an emitter on both
ends of the hilt, Attack of the Clones showed Anakin Skywalker dual wielding
sabers, and Revenge of the Sith included quad wielding them given sufficient
arms.

The Expanded Universe adds several lightsaber types including short,[7] dual-
phase (changeable length),[8][9] those attached to the end of a staff, and
those connected by a chainlink.

### [edit] Colors

Lightsaber blades in the movies are green or blue for Jedi, and a crimson red
for Sith. The only exception is Jedi Mace Windu's purple lightsaber in the
prequel trilogy. Lightsabers were initially designed to be either blue or red,
the colors of the two seen in Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope and The Empire
Strikes Back. Luke Skywalker's new lightsaber was blue during the initial
editing of Return of the Jedi, and appears so in an early trailer. The green-
bladed lightsaber was created because Luke's blue-bladed one would not have
contrasted enough with the blue sky in its introduction.[10]

The various Expanded Universe sources add a multitude of colors. The Kenner
figure of Luke Skywalker in his Tatooine costume from A New Hope was released
with a yellow lightsaber blade, which has appeared in several computer games,
such as Jedi Outcast. The Knights of the Old Republic games feature yellow,
cyan, viridian, violet, silver, and orange.[7] Star Wars: The Force Unleashed
adds black, with a white outline, and pink in the Nintendo DS version.
Multiple sources refer to a focusing crystal in the hilt as the source of the
blade's color.[7]

### [edit] Choreography

The duels were specifically choreographed to be miniature "stories." Gillard's
goal in choreographing the action for Episode I was to create stunts that flow
from the story. "You can't just think, 'I'm a stunt coordinator, I'm going to
make a big stunt happen'," Gillard says. "It's all about making it tie in
nicely with the film so that you don't notice the stunts." Creating narrative
through physical expression, Nick wrote each fight as an individual story that
supports the overall structure of the movie. "All the fights have a beginning,
a middle and an end," he says. "I worked hard to write them like a
story."....No two sword masters have exactly the same style, and the
subtleties of distinct identities are woven into the choreography of the
lightsaber battles. "It was important to me that each character in Episode I
have a distinctive fighting style," he says. Some of this shading came from
the classic Star Wars Trilogy."[citation needed]

In writing the prequel trilogy, George Lucas said he wanted the lightsaber
combat in the prequels to be "reminiscent of what had been done in the
previous films but also something that was more energized. We'd seen old men,
young boys, and characters who were half-droid, but we'd never seen a Jedi in
his prime. I wanted to do that with a fight that was faster and more dynamic-
and we were able to pull that off."[11]

According to prequel trilogy stunt coordinator Nick Gillard (who would later
go on to perform in a cameo role in the third prequel), various lightsaber
combat styles were devised for the prequels and intended to further
characterize their practitioners.

>     "I developed different styles for the characters, and gave each of them
a flaw or a bonus. So with Obi, for instance, he's got a very business-like
styleâwhen he was younger he could border on the flashy and might twirl his
lightsaber a bit, because he was taught by Qui-Gon. Qui-Gon was brash, that
rubbed off on Obi and Obi then taught Anakin, who was way too old to learn
anyway." "I think the style really worked well. The Jedi style of fighting is
an amalgamation of all the great swordfighting styles. Melding them together
is the difficult partâto move from a Kendo style to, say, Rapier requires a
complete change in body and feet movement, and this must look effortless. The
style moves seamlessly between the different disciplines, but remains
technically correct throughout. It's unlike any other style of fighting and I
think it's beautiful to watch." [12]

For The Phantom Menace, Gillard set out certain styles and faults for the
saber-wielding characters.[13] He added that the Jedi's use of such "a short-
range weapon" meant "they would have to be very good at it"; combining a
variety of disciplines from various swordfighting styles to martial arts "with
a touch of tennis and tree chopping", he created the style seen in the Episode
I lightsaber battles.[14]

## [edit] Appearances in popular culture

<IMG>

<IMG>

Luke Skywalker's prop lightsaber flew aboard Space Shuttle mission STS-120 in
2007.

  * In 2007, in honor of the 30th anniversary of the Star Wars, the lightsaber prop used by actor Mark Hamill in Star Wars Episode VI: Return of the Jedi was flown aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery mission STS-120 to the International Space Station and returned to Earth.[15][16]
  * Arguably one of the most sought-after props in film history, various toy replicas have been released, ranging from essentially a flashlight with a plastic tube attached, to accurate copies of the original film props, complete with motion-sensitive sound effects and colored blade. Toy lightsabers are consistently the best-selling of all Star Wars-related merchandise. Toy lightsabers powered by a 9-volt battery have been constructed with a plastic electroluminescent lamp constructed with conductive materials zinc sulphide and indium tin oxide, with electrical circuitry screen-printed onto the plastic.[17]
  * A mobile phone program called the Phonesaber, which simulated a lightsaber became very popular on Apple's iPhone.[18]
  * The fighting game Soulcalibur IV, ignoring its setting of 16th century Earth, features Darth Vader, Yoda, and The Apprentice as playable characters, wielding their lightsabers.

## [edit] Replicas

The discontinued Force-Fx Lightsaber is a replica of the Lightsaber props used
in the Star Wars series of films.

<IMG>

<IMG>

An example of the LED lights in action under low light conditions.

Unlike the cheaper Hasbro and Rubbies products, the Force-Fx sabers are not
designed as toys, but are instead considered collectors items. The hilts are
generally made of metal with a fixed polycarbon blade. The current range of
blade contains a string of coloured LED's that allow a scrolling effect when
turning the saber on, where the originals used Electro-Luminescent technology.
The hilt also houses a speaker that plays back sound samples of the power
on/off effect an idle hum and clash sounds.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Sophie Borland (2008-01-21). "Lightsabre wins the battle of movie weapons". The Daily Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/main.jhtml?xml=/news/2008/01/21/nweapon121.xml. Retrieved on 2008-01-26.
  2. ^ "Interview with Nelson Shin". CNN. 2007-11-09. http://edition.cnn.com/2007/WORLD/asiapcf/10/18/talkasia.nelsonshin/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-11.
  3. ^ a b Burtt, Ben (1993), Star Wars Trilogy: The Definitive Collection, Lucasfilm, "...the microphone passed right behind the picture tube and as it did, this particular microsophe produced an unusual hum. It picked up a transmission from the television set and a signal was induced into its sound reproducing mechanism, and that was a great buzz, actually. So I took that buzz and recorded it and combined it with the projector motor sound and that fifty-fifty kind of combination of those two sounds became the basic lightsaber tone.""
  4. ^ Lucas, George (May 1973), The Star Wars, story synopsis, "An alarm sounds. The rebels are forced to fight their way out of the prison with "multiple lazer guns" and swords."
  5. ^ Lucas, George (May 1974), The Star Wars, rough draft, "Ten troopers break out of the ranks and take up the chase. Starkiller runs down a corridor and rounds a corner, reaching a dead end. The troops round the corner and confront the trapped Jedi."
  6. ^ Lucas, George (1977), Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope
  7. ^ a b c BioWare. Knights of the Old Republic. (LucasArts). PC. (2003-11-19)
  8. ^ Anderson, Kevin J. (1994). Dark Apprentice. The Jedi Academy Trilogy. Bantam Spectra.
  9. ^ Foster, Alan Dean (1979). Splinter of the Mind's Eye. Ballantine Books.
  10. ^ "The trailer's here, anyone who can please dig up the details and change this cite to the details of the clip itself". http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cZFBclIaL7k.
  11. ^ Bouzereau, Laurent; Duncan, Jody (1999). Star Wars: The Making of Episode I: The Phantom Menace (Hardcover ed.). New York: Ballantine Publ. Group. ISBN 0345431111. , page 99
  12. ^ "March-Interview with stunt co-ordinator Nick Gillard (Mr. Optimism)". http://desiringhayden.net/press/news.php?newsid=95. Retrieved on 2008-11-28.
  13. ^ "Nick Gillard Talks ROTS Game". TheForce.Net. 2005-05-08. http://www.theforce.net/videogames/story/Nick_Gillard_Talks_ROTS_Game_92147.asp. Retrieved on 2008-11-28.
  14. ^ Episode I Video: Prime of the Jedi -(part of the "Making Episode I" series).
  15. ^ NASA (2007). "Items Taken Into Space Reflect Accomplishments on Earth". NASA. http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/behindscenes/Whatsgoingup.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-16.
  16. ^ Robert Z. Pearlman (August 28, 2007). "NASA Shuttle to Launch Luke Skywalker's Lightsaber". Space.com. http://www.space.com/entertainment/cs_070828_sts120_lightsaber.html. Retrieved on November 18, 2008.
  17. ^ "The Electroluminescent Light Sabre". Nanotechnology News Archive. Azonano. June 2, 2005. http://www.azonano.com/news.asp?newsID=1007. Retrieved on 2007-08-29.
  18. ^ Mike Butcher (2008-11-14). "Greatness within its grasp". Irish Times. http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/finance/2008/1114/1226408626719.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-18.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Lightsabers  
  * Lightsaber entry in the Star Wars Databank
  * Lightsaber on Wookieepedia: The Star Wars Wiki
  * Lucas' Light Saber Battle, (26 July 2001, E! Online) George Lucas suing Minrad Inc. over copyright of Light Saber name on their laser medical equipment
  * "Howstuffworks - Inside the Lightsaber"
  * Lightsaber combat on Wookieepedia: The Star Wars Wiki

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lightsaber"

Categories: Star Wars weapons | Fictional swords | Science fiction weapons |
Jedi

Hidden categories: Cite web templates using unusual accessdate parameters |
All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 03:24.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



