
# Diegesis

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Diegesis is

  1. the (fictional) world in which the situations and events narrated occur; and
  2. telling, recounting, as opposed to showing, enacting.[1]

In diegesis the narrator tells the story. The narrator presents to the
audience or the implied readers the actions, and perhaps thoughts, of the
characters.

## Contents

  * 1 Diegesis in contrast to mimesis
  * 2 What diegesis is
  * 3 Diegesis in literature
  * 4 Diegesis in film
    * 4.1 Film sound and music
  * 5 Diegesis in music-theatre
  * 6 Diegesis in role-playing games
  * 7 Footnotes
  * 8 Bibliography

  
## [edit] Diegesis in contrast to mimesis

Diegesis (Greek Î´Î¹Î®Î³Î·ÏÎ¹Ï) and mimesis (Greek Î¼Î¯Î¼Î·ÏÎ¹Ï) have been
contrasted since Plato's and Aristotle's times. Mimesis shows rather than
tells, by means of action that is enacted. Diegesis, however, is the telling
of the story by a narrator. The narrator may speak as a particular character
or may be the invisible narrator or even the all-knowing narrator who speaks
from above in the form of commenting on the action or the characters.

In Book III of his Republic (c.373BCE), the ancient Greek philosopher Plato
examines the "style" of "poetry" (the term includes comedy, tragedy, epic and
lyric poetry):[2] All types narrate events, he argues, but by differing means.
He distinguishes between narration or report (diegesis) and imitation or
representation (mimesis). Tragedy and comedy, he goes on to explain, are
wholly imitative types; the dithyramb is wholly narrative; and their
combination is found in epic poetry. When reporting or narrating, "the poet is
speaking in his own person; he never leads us to suppose that he is any one
else"; when imitating, the poet produces an "assimilation of himself to
another, either by the use of voice or gesture".[3] In dramatic texts, the
poet never speaks directly; in narrative texts, the poet speaks as him or
herself.[4]

In his Poetics, the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle argues that kinds of
"poetry" (the term includes drama, flute music, and lyre music for Aristotle)
may be differentiated in three ways: according to their medium, according to
their objects, and according to their mode or "manner" (section I); "For the
medium being the same, and the objects the same, the poet may imitate by
narrationâin which case he can either take another personality as Homer
does, or speak in his own person, unchangedâor he may present all his
characters as living and moving before us" (section III).

Though they conceive of mimesis in quite different ways, its relation with
diegesis is identical in Plato's and Aristotle's formulations; one represents,
the other reports; one embodies, the other narrates; one transforms, the other
indicates; one knows only a continuous present, the other looks back on a
past.

## [edit] What diegesis is

Diegesis may concern elements, such as characters, events and things within
the main or primary narrative. However, the author may include elements which
are not intended for the primary narrative, such as stories within stories;
characters and events that may be referred to elsewhere or in historical
contexts and that are therefore outside the main story and are thus presented
in an extradiegetic situation.

## [edit] Diegesis in literature

For narratologists, all parts of narrativesâcharacters, narrators,
existents, actorsâare characterized in terms of diegesis. For definitions of
diegesis, one should consult Aristotle's Poetics; Gerard Genette's Narrative
Discourse: An Essay in Method (Cornell University Press, 1980); or (for a
readable introduction) H. Porter Abbott's The Cambridge Introduction to
Narrative (Cambridge University Press 2002). In literature, discussions of
diegesis tend to concern discourse/sjuzet (in Russian Formalism) (vs.
story/fabula).

Diegesis is multi-levelled in narrative fiction. Genette distinguishes between
three "diegetic levels." The extradiegetic level (the level of the narrative's
telling) is, according to Prince, "external to (not part of) any diegesis."
One might think of this as what we commonly understand to be the narrator's
level, the level at which exists a narrator who is not part of the story he
tells. The diegetic level is understood as the level of the characters, their
thoughts and actions. The metadiegetic level or hypodiegetic level is that
part of a diegesis that is embedded in another one and is often understood as
a story within a story, as when a diegetic narrator himself/herself tells a
story.

## [edit] Diegesis in film

The classical distinction between the diegetic mode and the mimetic mode
relate to the difference between the epos (or epic poetry) and drama.[5] The
"epos" relates stories by telling them through narration, while drama enacts
stories through direct embodiment (showing). When we come to a modern
consideration of the cinema, it may appear that the medium is a straight-
forward example of mimetic storytelling--but it is not. In terms of classical
poetics, the cinema is an epic form that utilizes dramatic elements; this is
determined by the technologies of the camera and editing. Even in a spatially
and temporally continuous scene (mimicking the theatrical situation, as it
were), the camera chooses where to look for us. In a similar way, editing
causes us to jump from one place (and time sometimes) to another, whether it
be somewhere else in the room, or across town. This jump is a form of
narration; it is as if a narrator whispers to us: "meanwhile, on the other
side of the forest". It is for this reason that the "story-world" in cinema is
referred to as "diegetic"; elements that belong to the film's narrative world
are diegetic elements. This is why, in the cinema, we may refer to the film's
diegetic world

"Diegetic," in the cinema, typically refers to the internal world created by
the story that the characters themselves experience and encounter: the
narrative "space" that includes all the parts of the story, both those that
are and those that are not actually shown on the screen (such as events that
have led up to the present action; people who are being talked about; or
events that are presumed to have happened elsewhere).

Thus, elements of a film can be "diegetic" or "non-diegetic." These terms are
most commonly used in reference to sound in a film, but can apply to other
elements. For example, an insert shot that depicts something that is neither
taking place in the world of the film, nor is seen, imagined, or thought by a
character, is a non-diegetic insert. Titles, subtitles, and voice-over
narration (with some exceptions) are also non-diegetic.

### [edit] Film sound and music

<IMG>

This section may contain excessive, poor or irrelevant examples. You can
improve the article by adding more descriptive text and removing less
pertinent examples. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for
further suggestions. (March 2009)  
Sound in films is termed diegetic if it is part of the narrative sphere of the
film. For instance, if a character in the film is playing a piano, or turns on
a CD player, the resulting sound is "diegetic." If, on the other hand, music
plays in the background but cannot be heard by the film's characters, it is
termed non-diegetic or, more accurately, extra-diegetic. The score of a film
is "non-diegetic" sound. Some examples:

  * No Country For Old Men \- all diegetic sounds. no external soundtrack. the only semi-diegetic sound is the monologue at the beginning of the film. the lack of non-diegetic sounds forces the viewer to remain in the scene.

  * Jacques Tati's film Les Vacances de Monsieur Hulot (Mr. Hulot's Holiday) systematically builds much of its humor through the systematic confusion and shifting placement of "diegetic" and "non-diegetic" sound-image relationships, showing that these positions depend on the audience's perception of the mimetic space of the film.

  * In the 1959 film, School for Scoundrels, Alastair Sim's character, Mr. S. Potter, requests that the orchestra, unseen by the viewer, attenuate its music.

  * In Sunset Boulevard when we enter the mansion eerie organ music is playing, however, this is just the butler Max playing the organ.

  * In Blazing Saddles the new sheriff rides across the desert to swelling sound, revealed eventually as Count Basie and his well-known Big Band jazz group playing their hit "April in Paris" in the middle of the desert. Mel Brooks reuses this in High Anxiety with a symphony orchestra on a coach in the traffic surprising the protagonist, and hence the audience.

  * In The Truman Show, a sequence shows the characters at night, when most of them are sleeping. Soft, soothing music plays, as is common in such scenes, but we assume that it does not exist in the fictional world of the film. However, when the camera cuts to the control room of Truman's artificial world, we see that the mood music is being played by Philip Glass standing at a bank of keyboards. This abrupt shift from apparently non-diegetic to diegetic is a kind of cinematic joke.

  * The same joke is used in I'm Gonna Git You Sucka where the hero's theme is heard in a non-diegetic context and then the camera pans back to show a group of musicians following him, playing the music diegetically, after their presence is pointed out by another character. The hero goes on to describe the band as his theme music, also parodying the idea of character themes in the movies that the film itself parodies.

  * In other cases, a shift from diegetic to extra-diegetic context is less ostensible. In Kill Bill Volume 1, Daryl Hannah's character Elle Driver whistles the "Twisted Nerve" tune as she is walking down the hospital corridor to kill the bride. But as she enters a changing room, the music becomes background with additional instrumentation. In Volume 2, the reverse occurs: as Uma Thurman's character "The Bride" exits the wedding chapel, the sound of a flute playing appears entirely extra-diagetic, then shifts to diegesis as she appears to be hearing the music in her head, and finally becomes entirely diegetic as she realizes she can actually hear the flute in the world of the filmâit is being played by Bill, sitting outside the chapel.

  * A similar instance (but reversed) is in the Scrubs episode "My Mentor" - J.D. is listening to Leroy's "Good Time" diegetically on his mp3 player. However, it seems to shift to more ambient, although not non-diegetic sound as nurses change bedsheets in time with the music and the janitor sweeps the floor in time to the music followed by a patient and Dr Kelso lip-synching part of the chorus respectively.

  * Another example happens in the 2000 film Almost Famous, in a scene where Elton JohnÂ´s Tiny Dancer starts playing in the background, but suddenly shifts to diegetic when one of the band members starts singing it along, followed by the rest of the group in the bus.

  * In American Graffiti, Richard Dreyfus has a scene where he sits alone on a car hood watching TV's through a store window. The Platters song "Great Pretender" is heard and Dreyfus sings along under his breathe, leading us to believe the sound is diegetic. However, as the scene goes on we realize the sound isn't coming from the TV's, nor is the car radio on, hence the joke being it was non-diegetic but the character "Pretends" to hear it.

  * In the film Blowup, directed by Michelangelo Antonioni, all the music heard in the film is diegetic - either heard from a live pop group, record player or car radio.

  * Director Luis BuÃ±uel disliked non-diegetic music, and tried to avoid it in his films. The films of his French era have absolutely no score, some (Belle de Jour, Diary of a Chambermaid) contain absolutely no music whatsoever. Belle de Jour does, however, feature (potentially) non-diegetic sound effects, believed by some to be clues as to whether or not the current scene is a dream.

  * "The Sound of Drums", an episode of the BBC series Doctor Who, features a scene in which the Master concludes a threatening monologue by exclaiming "Here come the drums!", at which point the Rogue Traders single "Voodoo Child" begins playing over a PA system, beginning with the line "Here come the drums!/Here come the drums!". As the scene progresses, several quick shots show the character Lucy Saxon quietly dancing along to the song. The Master later flips a switch to turn off the music, as the soundtrack segues into a non-diegetic orchestral piece. In the same episode, it is established that the Master continually hears a drumming rhythm in his head, and this same rhythm is transferred to those under his control. This rhythm is based upon the underlying rhythm of the Doctor Who Theme.[6] The following episode, Last of the Time Lords, features the diegetic use of another song, "I Can't Decide" by the Scissor Sisters, as the Master sings along to a recording of the song while taunting the Doctor. 
    * In "The Stolen Earth", the season finale for the fourth series, the convention is played around with slightly. The episode features a crossover with The Sarah Jane Adventures, including an appearance by her supercomputer "Mr. Smith." In The Sarah Jane Adventures, the computer's activation is always heralded by an assumedly non-diegetic fanfare. However, In "The Stolen Earth," Sarah Jane irritatedly wishes that Mr. Smith could dispense with the actually diegetic fanfare!

  * In the Battlestar Galactica episode Crossroads several of the characters begin to hear music nobody else can, a version of the song "All Along the Watchtower". The music became a recurring diegetic theme that was often quoted by characters at key moments and strongly influenced various characters and the story of the final season, culminating in a cover of the song performed by the brother of the series' composer, Bear McCreary.[citations needed]

  * In the James Bond film Octopussy, there is a bit of diegesis that also breaks the fourth wall. British agent Vijay, disguised as a snake charmer, signals his affiliation to Bond and MI6 by playing the "James Bond Theme" on a recorder while Bond is disembarking from a boat in the harbor near the Taj Mahal, as if Bond would know that he has a theme song. Bond (Roger Moore) comments, "That's a charming tune!"

  * Xena, Mr. Incredible, Bart Simpson, and Invader Zim are all heard to hum or whistle their own theme songs.

  * Death Note has had references to the opening and ending videos, especially when Misa's cell phone ringtone is the ending theme song.

  * The film A Clockwork Orange has several occurrences of diegetic music. Sometimes the music is apparently only heard by the audience, other times the same music track is definitely heard by the characters. One example is the electronic version of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, Fourth Movement. The audience hears it when Alex visits a record store, but he gives no indication that he can hear it. Later, while undergoing psychological reprogramming, the same track plays over footage of Nazi Germany, and Alex comments on it. Some other segments of the Ninth are audible to Alex at various times. One odd bit of music is a pseudo-Top-40 song, "I Want to Marry a Lighthouse Keeper", which Alex's father extinguishes by switching the radio off. The track used in the film is a different portion of the song than appears in the soundtrack album version.

  * The film Eyes Wide Shut has an occurrence of diegesis. Classical music can be heard in the apartment of Dr. William "Bill" Harford and Alice Harford as they prepare for a Christmas party held by Victor Ziegler. The audience realizes the music is diegetic when Bill stops it by switching off a cd player.

  * The film Miller's Crossing features an example of diegetic music becoming non-diegetic. In one scene, the character Leo is listening to the song Danny Boy on a phonograph, when assassins come to kill him. His house is lit on fire, and he flees through the window, the music still playing. It continues as he kills off the assassins.
  * In the 2007 film Atonement the score is to a great extent made up of piano scoring combined with typewriter ticking. Often, characters are shown typing on a typewriter in rhythm with the music or playing a few notes on a piano and then stop, with the music stopping at the same time creating an interesting effect. An example of the crossover from non-diegetic to diegetic sound occurs in the evacuation of Dunkirk scene, when a long shot reveals the horrors of the beach. An instrumental score plays during this shot; when the camera pans over a choir of soldiers singingly morosely, the song they are singing harmonizes with the score.

  * Musicals are often a combination of diegesis and non-diegesis. For example, even when the characters are "aware" that they are singing (see below), there may be an off-screen orchestra accompanying them. The Wizard of Oz plays with this concept at one point. After the Witch's spell in the poppy field is broken, the off-screen "Optimistic Voices" begin their "You're out of the woods..." number. The Scarecrow looks around and moves in rhythm to the song, acknowledging the off-screen music. Likewise, when the Scarecrow sings If I Only Had a Brain (originally meant to be both sung and danced before the dance section was edited out), and when the Tin Man sings and dances If I Only Had a Heart, Dorothy congratulates them on their performance.

  * In the film Casablanca (film) almost the entire score is diegetic, played by Sam. The tune "As time goes by" has a special meaning for the protagonists. There is also a very strong scene with a musical battle between the Nazi Germans and the French people / Immigrants overpowering their hymn.

  * Duke Ellington's score of Anatomy of a Murder has been recognized by film historians "as a landmark -- the first significant Hollywood film music by African Americans comprising non-diegetic music, that is, music whose source is not visible or implied by action in the film, like an on-screen band." The score avoided the cultural stereotypes which previously characterized jazz scores and rejected a strict adherence to visuals in ways that presaged the New Wave cinema of the â60s."[7]

## [edit] Diegesis in music-theatre

As with film, the term "diegetic" refers to the function of the music within a
work's theatrical narrative, with particular relevance to the role of song.
Within the typical format of opera/operetta, characters are not "aware" that
they are singing. This is a non-diegetic use of song. If however the song is
presented as a musical occurrence within the plot, then the number may be
described as "diegetic".

For example, in The Sound of Music, the song "Do-Re-Mi" is diegetic, since the
characters are aware they are singing. The character Maria is using the song
to teach the children how to sing. It exists within the narrative sphere of
the characters. In contrast, the song "How Do You Solve A Problem Like Maria?"
is non-diegetic, since the musical material exists externally to the
narrative.

In both the 1936 and the 1951 film versions of Show Boat, as well as in the
original stage version, the song "Bill" is diegetic. The character Julie
LaVerne sings it during a rehearsal in a nightclub. A solo piano (played
onscreen) accompanies her, and the film's offscreen orchestra (presumably not
heard by the characters) sneaks in for the second verse of the song. Julie's
other song in the film, Can't Help Lovin' Dat Man is also diegetic. In the
1936 film, it is supposed to be an old folk song known only to blacks; in the
1951 film it is merely a song which Julie knows; however, she and the
captain's daughter Magnolia are fully aware that Julie is singing. When Julie,
Queenie, and the black chorus sing the second chorus of the song in the 1936
version, they are presumably unaware of any orchestral accompaniment, but in
the 1951 film, when Magnolia sings and dances this same chorus, she does so to
the accompaniment of two deckhands on the boat playing a banjo and a
harmonica, respectively. Two other songs in the 1936 Show Boat are also
diegetic, "Goodbye My Lady Love" (sung by the comic dancers Ellie and Frank),
and After the Ball, sung by Magnolia. Both are interpolated into the film, and
both are performed in the same nightclub in which Julie sings Bill.

The "Once More, with Feeling" episode of Buffy the Vampire Slayer toys with
the concept of non-diegetic versus diegetic music when the characters find
themselves compelled to burst into song in the style of a musical. The
audience's first critical assumptionâthat this is a "musical episode" where
the Buffy cast is presumably unaware that they are singingâis overturned
when it becomes clear that the characters are all too aware of their musical
interludes and that determining the supernatural causes for the singing will
be the focus of the episode's story. The audience is then forced to abandon
one form of suspension of disbelief (i.e. that musical numbers will go
unacknowledged by the characters in a musical) in favor of another (that the
characters are aware of how unnatural spontaneous singing is in the context of
the "real world").

## [edit] Diegesis in role-playing games

In role-playing games diegesis includes all the "in-game" parts of the story,
both those that are and aren't actually played out. However, rules or system
elements that are used to resolve what does and doesn't happen in the imagined
situation are typically "non-diegetic." For example, the number of hit points
that a character has may determine whether or not a character dies in a fight,
but are not themselves part of the narrative situation. The term "meta-
concept" is also used for some non-diegetic elements.[citation needed]

Discussion of non-diegetic information by role-playing characters comprises
much of the humor in the comic strip The Order of the Stick. For example,
characters frequently discuss their saving throws, hit points, and experience
points. Cartoon tropes are also skewered, such as when one character notices
that another "has the X's in the eyes" - in other words, is dead. This is
similarly carried out in the comic 8-Bit Theater where the character Red Mage
constantly talks about his stats and how he can manipulate them to his favor,
much to the bewilderment of his comrades.

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ Gerald Prince, A Dictionary of Narratology, 2003, University of Nebraska Press, ISBN 08-03287763
  2. ^ An etext of Plato's Republic is available from Project Gutenberg. The most relevant section is the following: "You are aware, I suppose, that all mythology and poetry is a narration of events, either past, present, or to come? / Certainly, he replied. / And narration may be either simple narration, or imitation, or a union of the two? / [...] / And this assimilation of himself to another, either by the use of voice or gesture, is the imitation of the person whose character he assumes? / Of course. / Then in this case the narrative of the poet may be said to proceed by way of imitation? / Very true. / Or, if the poet everywhere appears and never conceals himself, then again the imitation is dropped, and his poetry becomes simple narration."(Plato, Republic, Book III.)
  3. ^ Plato, Republic, Book III.
  4. ^ See also Pfister (1977, 2-3) and Elam: "classical narrative is always oriented towards an explicit there and then, towards an imaginary "elsewhere" set in the past and which has to be evoked for the reader through predication and description. Dramatic worlds, on the other hand, are presented to the spectator as "hypothetically actual" constructs, since they are "seen" in progress "here and now" without narratorial mediation. [...] This is not merely a technical distinction but constitutes, rather, one of the cardinal principles of a poetics of the drama as opposed to one of narrative fiction. The distinction is, indeed, implicit in Aristotle's differentiation of representational modes, namely diegesis (narrative description) versus mimesis (direct imitation)" (1980, 110-111).
  5. ^ Elam (1980, 110-111).
  6. ^ Freema Agyeman, Trevor Laird, Gugu Mbatha-Raw. The Sound of Drums commentary BBC's Doctor Who microsite Podcast accessed on 2007-06-25
  7. ^ Booe, Mervyn, âHistory of Film Musicâ (Cambridge, $24.99). Stryker, Mark, Music Critic, Ellington's score still celebrated, January 20, 2009 Detroit Free Press.

## [edit] Bibliography

Sister project Look up diegesis in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * Aristotle. 1974. "Poetics". Trans. S.H. Butcher. In Dramatic Theory and Criticism: Greeks to Grotowski. Ed. Bernard F. Dukore. Florence, KY: Heinle & Heinle. ISBN 0030911524. p.31-55.
  * Elam, Keir. 1980. The Semiotics of Theatre and Drama. New Accents Ser. London and New York: Methuen. ISBN 0416720609.
  * Pfister, Manfred. 1977. The Theory and Analysis of Drama. Trans. John Halliday. European Studies in English Literature Ser. Cambridige: Cambridge University Press, 1988. ISBN 052142383X.
  * Plato. c.373BCE. Republic. Retrieved from Project Gutenberg on 2 September 2007.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diegesis"

Categories: Film theory | Narratology

Hidden categories: Articles with too many examples | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2009 |
Articles with unsourced statements since March 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 03:27 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



