
# Laura Mulvey

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Laura Mulvey (born August 15, 1941) was educated at St Hilda's College,
Oxford. She is currently professor of film and media studies at Birkbeck,
University of London. She worked at the British Film Institute for many years
before taking up her current position.

During the 2008-09 academic year, Mulvey will be the Mary Cornille
Distinguished Visiting Professor in the Humanities at Wellesley College.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 As a film theorist
  * 2 Phallocentrism and patriarchy
  * 3 As a film maker
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links
  * 7 Further reading

  
## [edit] As a film theorist

Mulvey is best known for her essay, "Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema",
written in 1973 and published in 1975 in the influential British film theory
journal Screen. It later appeared in a collection of her essays entitled
Visual and Other Pleasures, and numerous other anthologies. Her article was
one of the first major essays that helped shift the orientation of film theory
towards a psychoanalytic framework, influenced by the theories of Sigmund
Freud and Jacques Lacan. Prior to Mulvey, film theorists such as Jean-Louis
Baudry and Christian Metz had attempted to use psychoanalytic ideas in their
theoretical accounts of the cinema, but Mulvey's contribution was to
inaugurate the intersection of film theory, psychoanalysis, and feminism.

Mulvey's article engaged in no empirical research on film audiences. She
instead stated that she intended to make a "political use" of Freud and Lacan,
and then used some of their concepts to argue that the cinematic apparatus of
classical Hollywood cinema inevitably put the spectator in a masculine subject
position, with the figure of the woman on screen as the object of desire. In
the era of classical Hollywood cinema, viewers were encouraged to identify
with the protagonist of the film, who tended to be a man. Meanwhile, Hollywood
female characters of the 1950s and 60s were, according to Mulvey, coded with
"to-be-looked-at-ness." Mulvey suggests that there were two distinct modes of
the male gaze of this era: "voyeuristic" (i.e. seeing women as 'whores') and
"fetishistic" (i.e. seeing women as 'madonnas').

Mulvey argued that the only way to annihilate the "patriarchal" Hollywood
system was to radically challenge and re-shape the filmic strategies of
classical Hollywood with alternative feminist methods. She called for a new
feminist avant-garde filmmaking that would rupture the magic and pleasure of
classical Hollywood filmmaking. She wrote, "It is said that analysing pleasure
or beauty annihilates it. That is the intention of this article."

Some feminists criticized "Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema," claiming
that, while Mulvey believed that classical Hollywood cinema reflected and
shaped the "patriarchal order," the perspective of her writing actually
remained within that very heterosexual order. The article was thus said to
have contradicted its "radical" claims, by actually being a covert
perpetuation of heterosexual patriarchal order. This was because, in her
article, Mulvey presupposes the spectator to be a heterosexual man. She was
thus felt to be denying the existence of lesbian women, gay men, heterosexual
women, and those outside of these identities.

"Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema" was the subject of much
interdisciplinary discussion among film theorists that continued into the mid
1980s. Critics of the article objected to the fact that her argument implied
the impossibility of genuine 'feminine' enjoyment of the classical Hollywood
cinema, and to the fact that her argument did not seem to take into account
spectatorships that were not organised along the normative lines of gender.
For example, a metaphoric 'transvestism' might be possible when viewing a film
â a male viewer might enjoy a 'feminine' point-of-view provided by a film,
or vice versa; gay, lesbian and bisexual spectatorships might also be
different. Her article also did not take into account the findings of the
later wave of media audience studies on the complex nature of fan cultures and
their interaction with stars. Gay male film theorists such as Richard Dyer
have used Mulvey's work as a starting point to explore the complex projections
that many gay men fix onto certain female stars (e.g. Liza Minnelli, Greta
Garbo, Judy Garland).

Feminist critic Gaylyn Studlar wrote extensively to contradict Mulvey's
central thesis that the spectator is male and derives visual pleasure from a
dominant, sadistic perspective. Studlar suggested rather that visual pleasure
for all audiences is derived from a passive, masochistic perspective, where
the audience seeks to be powerless and overwhelmed by the cinematic image.

Mulvey later wrote that her article was meant to be a provocation or a
manifesto, rather than a reasoned academic article that took all objections
into account. She addressed many of her critics, and changed some of her
opinions, in a follow-up article, "Afterthoughts on 'Visual Pleasure and
Narrative Cinema'" (which also appears in the Visual and Other Pleasures
collection).

Mulvey's most recent book is titled Death 24x a Second: Stillness and the
Moving Image (2006).

## [edit] Phallocentrism and patriarchy

See also: Neo-Freudianism

Mulvey incorporates the Freudian idea of phallocentrism into "Visual Pleasure
and Narrative Cinema". Specifically relating the phallocentric theory to film,
Mulvey insists on the idea that film and cinematography are inadvertently
structured upon the ideas and values of a patriarchy.[2]

Within her essay, Mulvey discusses several different types of spectatorship
that occur while viewing a film. Viewing a film involves subconsciously
engaging in the understanding of male and female roles. The "three different
looks", as they are referred to, explain just exactly how films are viewed in
relation to phallocentrism. The first "look" refers to the camera as it
records the actual events of the film. The second "look" describes the nearly
voyeuristic act of the audience as one engages in watching the film itself.
Lastly, the third "look" refers to the characters that interact with one
another throughout the film.[2]

The main idea that seems to bring these actions together is that "looking" is
generally seen as an active male role while the passive role of being looked
at is immediately adopted as a female characteristic. It is under the
construction of patriarchy that Mulvey argues that women in film are tied to
desire and that female characters hold an "appearance coded for strong visual
and erotic impact". The female actor is never meant to represent a character
that directly effects the outcome of a plot or keep the story line going, but
is inserted into the film as a way of supporting the male role and "bearing
the burden of sexual objectification" that he cannot.[2]

## [edit] As a film maker

Mulvey was prominent as an avant-garde filmmaker in the 1970s and 1980s. With
Peter Wollen, her husband, she co-wrote and co-directed Penthesilea: Queen of
the Amazons (1974), Riddles of the Sphinx (1977 - perhaps their most
influential film), AMY! (1980), Crystal Gazing (1982), Frida Kahlo and Tina
Modotti (1982), and The Bad Sister. In 1991, she returned to filmmaking with
Disgraced Monuments, which she co-directed with Mark Lewis.

## [edit] See also

Gaze

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Newhouse Center for the Humanities Newhouse Center for the Humanities - Personnel - Wellesley College
  2. ^ a b c Laura Mulvey (1975). "Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema". Screen 16(3): 6â18. Online version.

## [edit] External links

  * Laura Mulvey at the British Film Institute's Screenonline

## [edit] Further reading

  * Laura Mulvey (1975). "Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema". Screen 16(3): 6â18. Online version.
  * Laura Mulvey (1989). Visual and Other Pleasures. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-20494-1.
  * Gaylyn Studlar (1993). In the Realm of Pleasure. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0231082339.
  * Rakhee Balaram (2007). Laura Mulvey and Peter Wollen. Online version.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laura_Mulvey"

Categories: 1941 births | Living people | British experimental filmmakers |
Feminist studies scholars | Film theorists | Gender studies academics |
Academics of Birkbeck, University of London

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * PortuguÃªs
  * SlovenÄina

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 11 February 2009, at 02:14 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



