
# Apocalypse Now

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the Pere Ubu album, see Apocalypse Now (album).

Apocalypse Now  
<IMG>  
theatrical release poster by Bob Peak  
Directed by Francis Ford Coppola  
Produced by Francis Ford Coppola  
Written by Novel:  
Joseph Conrad  
Screenplay:  
John Milius  
Francis Ford Coppola  
Narrated by Martin Sheen  
Starring Martin Sheen  
Marlon Brando  
Robert Duvall  
Frederic Forrest  
Sam Bottoms  
Laurence Fishburne  
Albert Hall  
Harrison Ford  
Music by Carmine Coppola  
Francis Ford Coppola  
Cinematography Vittorio Storaro  
Editing by Gerald B. Greenberg  
Walter Murch  
Distributed by United Artists (1979)  
Miramax Films (2001)  
Paramount Pictures (current)  
Release date(s) 15 August 1979  
28 August 1987 (re-release)  
3 August 2001 (redux)  
Running time Theatrical cut:  
153 minutes  
Redux:  
202 minutes  
Original cut:  
289 minutes  
Country United States  
Language English  
Budget $31.5 million  
Gross revenue $78,784,010 (1979)  
$83,471,511 (2002)  
Apocalypse Now is an American 1979 epic war film set during the Vietnam War.
It tells the tale of Army Captain Benjamin L. Willard (Martin Sheen) who is
sent into the jungle to assassinate United States Army Special Forces Colonel
Walter E. Kurtz (Marlon Brando), who has gone AWOL and is believed to be
insane. The film was produced and directed by Francis Ford Coppola from a
script by Coppola and John Milius, based on Joseph Conrad's novella Heart of
Darkness, as well as drawing elements from Michael Herr's Dispatches, the film
version of Conrad's Lord Jim (which shares the same character of Marlow with
Heart of Darkness), and from Werner Herzog's Aguirre, the Wrath of God
(1972).[1]

The film became notorious in the entertainment press due to its lengthy and
troubled production as documented in Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker's
Apocalypse. Marlon Brando showed up to the set overweight and Martin Sheen
suffered a heart attack. The production was also beset by extreme weather that
destroyed several expensive sets. In addition, the release date of the film
was delayed several times as Coppola struggled to come up with an ending and
edit the millions of feet of footage that he had shot.

The character of Colonel Kurtz is widely believed to be modeled after a famous
CIA Paramilitary Officer named Tony Poe from their famed Special Activities
Division.[2] Poe was known to use human ears to record the number of enemy
killed. He sent these ears back to the CIA station as proof of his efforts
deep into enemy territory in Laos. Poe was one of the very few that received
two Intelligence Stars for his actions in combat. These are the second highest
award for valor in the CIA and analogous to the U.S. Military's Silver
Star.[3][4]

The film won the Cannes Palme d'Or and was nominated for the Academy Award for
Best Picture and the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture â Drama.

  

## Contents

  * 1 Plot
  * 2 Cast
  * 3 Adaptation
  * 4 Development
    * 4.1 Screenplay
    * 4.2 Pre-production
    * 4.3 Casting
    * 4.4 Principal photography
    * 4.5 Post-production
  * 5 Alternate versions
    * 5.1 Endings
    * 5.2 Extended bootleg version
    * 5.3 Apocalypse Now Redux
  * 6 Reaction
    * 6.1 Cannes screening
    * 6.2 Box office
    * 6.3 Critical response
    * 6.4 Legacy
  * 7 Awards and honors
  * 8 Home video release aspect ratio issues
  * 9 References
    * 9.1 Notes
    * 9.2 Bibliography
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Plot

It is 1969 and the war is at its height. CPT Benjamin L. Willard (Martin
Sheen) has returned to Saigon; a seasoned veteran, he is deeply troubled and
apparently no longer adjusted to civilian life. Two intelligence officers, LTG
Corman (G. D. Spradlin) and COL Lucas (Harrison Ford), as well as a government
man (Jerry Ziesmer), approach him with a special mission: journey up the
fictional Nung River into the remote Cambodian jungle to find COL Walter E.
Kurtz (Marlon Brando), a former member of the United States Army Special
Forces.

They state that Kurtz, once considered a model officer and future general, has
allegedly gone insane and is commanding a legion of his own Montagnard troops
deep inside the forest in neutral Cambodia. Their claims are supported by very
disturbing radio broadcasts and/or recordings made by Kurtz himself. Willard
is ordered to undertake a mission to find Kurtz and terminate the Colonel's
command "with extreme prejudice."

Willard studies the intelligence files during the boat ride to the river
entrance and learns that Kurtz, isolated in his compound, has assumed the role
of a warlord and is worshipped by the natives and his own loyal men. Willard
learns much later that another officer, Colby (Scott Glenn), sent earlier to
kill Kurtz, may have become one of his lieutenants.

Willard begins his trip up the Nung River on a PBR (Patrol Boat, Riverine),
with an eclectic crew composed of the obstinate and formal QMC George Phillips
(Albert Hall), the Navy PBR boat captain; GM3 Lance B. Johnson (Sam Bottoms),
a tanned all-American California surfer; GM3 Tyrone Miller (Laurence
Fishburne), a.k.a. "Mr. Clean", a black 17-year-old from "some South Bronx
shit-hole"; and EN3 Jay "Chef" Hicks (Frederic Forrest), an aspiring sauce
chef from New Orleans, whom Willard describes as "wrapped too tight for
Vietnam, probably wrapped too tight for New Orleans".

The PBR arrives at a landing zone where Willard and the crew meet up with LTC
Bill Kilgore (Robert Duvall), the eccentric commander of 1/9cav AirCav,
following a massive and hectic mopping-up operation of a conquered enemy
village. Kilgore, a keen surfer, recognizes and befriends Johnson. Later, he
learns from one of his men, Mike, that the beach down the coast which marks
the opening to the river is perfect for surfing, a factor which persuades him
to capture it. The problem is, his troops explain, it's "Charlie's point" and
heavily fortified. Dismissing this complaint with the explanation that
"Charlie don't surf," Kilgore orders his men to saddle up in the morning to
capture the town and the beach. Riding high above the coast in a fleet of
Hueys accompanied by OH-6As, Kilgore launches an attack on the beach. The
scene, famous for its use of Richard Wagner's "Ride of the Valkyries," ends
with the soldiers surfing the barely claimed beach amidst skirmishes between
infantry and VC. After helicopters swoop over the village and demolish all
visible signs of resistance, a giant napalm strike in the nearby jungle
dramatically marks the climax of the battle. Kilgore exults to Willard, "I
love the smell of napalm in the morning", which he says smells "like...
victory" as he recalls a battle in which a hill was bombarded with napalm for
over twelve hours.

The lighting and mood darken as the boat navigates upstream and Willard's
silent obsession with Kurtz deepens. Incidents on the journey include a run-in
with a tiger while Willard and Chef search for mangoes. The boat then moves up
river and watches a USO show featuring Playboy Bunnies and a centerfold that
degenerates into chaos.

Moving up the river, Phillips spots a sampan and against Willard's advice they
make the boat stop and inspect it. As Chef hostilely searches the sampan, one
of the civilians makes a sudden movement towards a barrel, causing Clean to
open fire on the wooden boat, killing all the civilians save for one badly
wounded survivor. Chef discovers that the barrel contained the pet puppy of
one of the sampan's crew. An argument breaks out between Willard and Phillips
over whether to take the survivor to receive medical attention. Willard ends
the argument by shooting the survivor, calmly stating "I told you not to
stop."

The boat moves up river to a surreal stop at the American outpost at the Do
Long bridge, the last U.S. Army outpost on the river. The boat arrives during
a North Vietnamese attack on the bridge, which is under constant construction.
Upon arrival Willard receives the last piece of the dossier from an officer
named Lt. Carlson, along with mail for the boat crewmen. Willard and Lance,
who has taken LSD, go ashore and they make their way through the trenches
where they encounter many panicked, leaderless soldiers. Willard asks a
machine gunner if he knows who the commanding officer is, but the machine
gunner replies "Ain't you?". As they talk, a North Vietnamese soldier hiding
under a pile of his dead comrades constantly swears at them and cries for
help. A soldier named Roach (Herb Rice), armed with a tiger-striped M79
grenade launcher, promptly dispatches the NVA soldier. Willard asks Roach if
he knows who is in command, and Roach only smirks and replies that he does.
Realizing the situation has devolved into chaos, Willard and Lance return to
the boat. The chief tries to convince Willard not to continue on with his
mission (which he does not truly know the details of). He compares the mission
to the Do Long bridge, which is destroyed every night but rebuilt so that it
can be said the road is open, and that the mission is insignificant. In
response, Willard snaps at Phillips to get him upriver. As the boat departs,
the NVA launch an artillery strike on the bridge, destroying it.

The next day the PBR, while its crew is busy reading mail, is ambushed by Viet
Cong hiding in the trees by the river which results in Clean's death as he
listens to a tape from his mother. The chief, who had a father-son
relationship with Clean, becomes openly hostile to Willard. As they approach
the outskirts of Kurtz' camp, Montagnard villagers begin firing toy arrows at
them. The crew opens fire until the chief is hit by a real spear. As Willard
hovers over the mortally wounded Chief Phillips, he attempts to kill Willard
by pulling him onto the spearpoint protruding from his chest. Willard
subsequently smothers the chief with his bare hands.

After arriving at Kurtz' outpost, Willard leaves Chef behind with orders to
call in an air strike on the village if he does not return. They are met by a
seemingly crazed freelance photographer (Dennis Hopper) who explains Kurtz's
greatness and philosophical skills to provoke his people into following him.
Willard also encounters Colby, in an apparently shell-shocked state. Brought
before Kurtz and held in captivity in a darkened temple, Willardâs
constitution appears to weaken as Kurtz lectures him on his theories of war,
humanity, and civilization. Kurtz explains his motives and philosophy in a
famous and haunting monologue in which he praises the ruthlessness of the
Vietcong he witnessed following one of his own humanitarian missions.

While bound outside in the pouring rain, Willard is approached by Kurtz, who
places the severed head of Chef in his lap. Coppola makes little explicit, but
we come to believe that Willard and Kurtz develop an understanding
nonetheless; Kurtz wishes to die at Willard's hands, and Willard, having
subsequently granted Kurtz his wish, is offered the chance to succeed him in
his warlord-demigod role. Juxtaposed with a ceremonial slaughtering of a water
buffalo, Willard enters Kurtz's chamber during one of his message recordings,
and kills him with a machete. This entire sequence is set to "The End" by The
Doors, as is the sequence at the very beginning of the film. Lying bloody and
dying on the ground, Kurtz whispers "The horror... the horror," a line taken
directly from Conrad's novella. Willard drops his weapon as in turn the
natives do in a symbolic act of laying down of arms,he walks through the now-
silent crowd of natives and takes Johnson (who is now fully integrated into
the native society) by the hand. He leads Johnson to the PBR, and floats away
as Kurtz's final words echo in the wind as the screen fades to black.

## [edit] Cast

  * Martin Sheen as Captain Benjamin L. Willard. Willard is a veteran who has been in Vietnam for three years. He is in U.S. Special Forces and it is implied Willard worked for MACV-SOG and even the CIA. His attempt to re-integrate into society failed and he was sent back to Vietnam.
  * Marlon Brando as Colonel Walter E. Kurtz, the highly decorated American Army Special Forces officer who goes renegade. He runs his own operations out of Cambodia and is feared by the US Military as much as the Vietnamese.
  * Robert Duvall as Lieutenant Colonel William "Bill" Kilgore, Cavalry battalion commander and surfing fanatic. Kilgore is a strong leader who loves his men dearly but has methods that appear out-of-tune with the setting of the war.
  * Frederic Forrest as Engineman 3rd Class Jay "Chef" Hicks, a tightly-wound former chef from New Orleans who is horrified by his surroundings.
  * Sam Bottoms as Gunner's Mate 3rd Class Lance B. Johnson, a former professional surfer from California who spends the majority of the journey on a drug binge.
  * Laurence Fishburne as Gunner's Mate 3rd Class Tyrone "Mr. Clean" Miller, the 17 year old cocky South Bronx born crewmember. He resents the inward nature of Willard.
  * Albert Hall as Chief Quartermaster George Phillips. The chief runs a tight ship and frequently clashes with Willard over authority. Has a father-son relationship with Clean.
  * G.D. Spradlin as Lieutenant General Corman, military intelligence (G-2) an authoritarian officer who fears Kurtz and wants him removed.
  * Jerry Ziesmer as a mysterious man in civilian attire who sits in on Willard's initial briefing, is the only one calm enough to eat during the briefing, and whose only line in the movie is the famous "Terminate with extreme prejudice".
  * Dennis Hopper as an American Photojournalist, a crazed photographer who intercuts poetry with obscene cynicism. Stranded in Kurtz's camp. Takes pictures from a camera that may or may not contain film. According to the DVD commentary of Redux, the journalist is a supposed to be a real life photographer who went missing in Vietnam in 1966. Coppola stated that Hopper's character is supposed to be the real life journalist years later.
  * Harrison Ford as Colonel Lucas, aide to Corman and general information specialist. Despite his rank, he often appears nervous and jittery regarding Kurtz and the mission.
  * Scott Glenn as Captain Richard M. Colby, previously assigned Willard's current mission before he defected to Kurtz's private army and sent a message to his wife telling her to sell everything they owned (but he goes on to tell her to sell their children, as well).
  * Bill Graham as Agent (announcer and in charge of Playmate's show)
  * Cynthia Wood as Playmate of the Year
  * Colleen Camp as Playmate, "Miss May"
  * Linda Carpenter as Playmate, "Miss August"
  * Christian Marquand as Hubert de Marais (redux version)
  * Aurore ClÃ©ment as Roxanne Sarraut-de Marais (redux version), a widow and influential figure at the plantation.
  * Roman Coppola as Francis de Marais (redux version), the surrogate leader of the French residents and strong vocal opponent of American action.
  * Francis Coppola himself has a cameo as a director filming beach combat. He shouts "Don't look at the camera, keep on fighting!" DP Vittorio Storaro plays the cameraman by Coppola's side.

Several actors who were, or later became, prominent stars have minor roles in
the movie including Harrison Ford, G. D. Spradlin, Scott Glenn, and R. Lee
Ermey. Fishburne was only fourteen years old when shooting began in March
1976, and he lied about his age in order to get cast in his role.[5]
Apocalypse Now took so long to finish that Fishburne was seventeen (the same
age as his character) by the time of its release.

## [edit] Adaptation

Although inspired by Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness, the film deviates
extensively from its source material. The novella, based on Conrad's real
experiences as a steam paddleboat captain in Africa, is set in the Congo Free
State during the 19th century. Kurtz and Marlow (who is named Willard in the
movie) both work for a Belgian trading company that brutally exploits its
native African workers.

When Marlow arrives at Kurtz's outpost, he discovers that Kurtz has gone
insane and is lording over a small tribe as a god. The novella ends with Kurtz
dying on the trip back and the narrator musing about darkness of the human
psyche: "the heart of an immense darkness."

In the novella, Marlow is the pilot of a river boat sent to collect ivory from
Kurtz's outpost, only gradually becoming infatuated with Kurtz. In fact, when
he discovers Kurtz in terrible health, Marlow makes a concerted effort to
bring him home safely. In the movie, Willard is an assassin dispatched to kill
Kurtz. Nevertheless, the depiction of Kurtz as a god-like leader of a tribe of
natives and his malarial fever, Kurtz's written exclamation "Exterminate the
brutes!" (which appears in the film as "Drop the bomb. Exterminate them All!")
and his final lines "The horror! The horror!" are taken from Conrad's novella.

Coppola argues that many episodes in the filmâthe spear and arrow attack on
the boat, for exampleârespect the spirit of the novella and in particular
its critique of the concepts of civilization and progress. Other episodes
adapted by Coppola, the Playboy bunnies (Sirens) exit, the lost souls, "taking
me home" attempting to reach the boat and Kurtz' tribe of (white-faced)
natives parting the canoes (gates of Hell) for Willard, (with Chef and Lance)
to enter the camp are likened to Virgil and "The Inferno" (Divine Comedy) by
Dante. While Coppola replaced European colonialism with American
interventionism, the message of Conrad's book is still clear.[6]

## [edit] Development

While working as an assistant for Francis Ford Coppola on The Rain People,
George Lucas encouraged his friend and filmmaker John Milius to write a
Vietnam War film.[7] Milius came up with the idea for adapting the plot of
Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness to the Vietnam War setting.[8] He had no
desire to direct the film and felt that George Lucas was the right person for
the job. However, filmmaker Carroll Ballard claims that Apocalypse Now was his
idea in 1967 before Milius had written his screenplay. Ballard had a deal with
producer Joel Landon and they tried to get the rights to Conrad's book but
were unsuccessful. Lucas acquired the rights but failed to tell Ballard and
Landon.[8]

### [edit] Screenplay

Coppola gave Milius $15,000 to write the screenplay with the promise of an
additional $10,000 if it got made.[9] Milius claims that he wrote the
screenplay in 1969[8] and it was originally called The Psychedelic
Soldier.[10] He wanted to use Conrad's novel as "a sort of allegory. It would
have been too simple to have followed the book completely".[9] He based the
character of Willard and some of Kurtz on a friend of his, Fred Rexer, who had
experienced, first-hand, the scene related by Marlon Brando's character where
the arms of villagers are hacked off by the Viet Cong. At one point, Coppola
told Milius, "write every scene you ever wanted to go into that movie",[8] and
he wrote ten drafts - over a thousand pages.[11] Milius changed the film's
title to Apocalypse Now after being inspired by a button badge popular with
hippies during the '60s that said, "Nirvana Now". He was also influenced by an
article written by Michael Herr entitled, "The Battle for Khe San", which
referred to drugs, rock 'n' roll, and people calling airstrikes down on
themselves.[8]

### [edit] Pre-production

Coppola was drawn to Milius' script, which he described as "a comedy and a
terrifying psychological horror story".[12] George Lucas was originally
interested in directing and planned to shoot it after making THX 1138 with
principal photography to start in 1971. He planned to shoot the film in the
rice fields between Stockton and Sacramento, California.[9] His friend and
producer Gary Kurtz traveled to the Philippines, scouting suitable locations.
They intended to shoot the film on a $2 million budget, documentary style,
using 16 mm cameras, and real soldiers.[8] However, Lucas became involved with
American Graffiti and this delayed the production of Apocalypse Now.[9] In the
spring of 1974, Coppola discussed with friends and co-producers Fred Roos and
Gary Frederickson the idea of producing the film.[13]

While making The Godfather Part II, Coppola asked Lucas and then Milius to
direct Apocalypse Now, but both men were involved with other projects,[13] in
Lucas' case, he got the go-ahead to make his pet project, Star Wars, and
declined the offer to direct Apocalypse Now.[8] Coppola was determined to make
the film and pressed ahead himself. He envisioned the film as a definitive
statement on the nature of modern war, the difference between good and evil,
and the impact of American society on the rest of the world. The director said
that he wanted to take the audience "through an unprecedented experience of
war and have them react as much as those who had gone through the war".[12]

In 1975, while promoting The Godfather Part II in Australia, Coppola and his
producers scouted possible locations for Apocalypse Now in Cairns in northern
Queensland that had jungle resembling Vietnam.[14] He decided to make his film
in the Philippines for its access to American equipment and cheap labor.
Production coordinator Fred Roos had already made two low-budget films there
for Monte Hellman and had friends and contacts in the country.[12] Coppola
spent the last few months of 1975 revising Milius' script and negotiating with
United Artists to secure financing for the production. According to
Frederickson, the budget was estimated between $12-14 million.[15] Coppola's
American Zoetrope assembled $8 million from distributors outside the United
States and $7.5 million from United Artists who assumed that the film would
star Marlon Brando, Steve McQueen, and Gene Hackman.[12] Frederickson went to
the Philippines and had dinner with President Ferdinand Marcos to formalize
support for the production and to allow them to use some of the country's
military equipment.[16]

### [edit] Casting

<IMG>

<IMG>

Marlon Brando as Colonel Kurtz.

Steve McQueen was Coppola's first choice to play Willard but the actor did not
accept because he did not want to leave the country for 17 weeks.[12] Al
Pacino was also offered the role but he too did not want to be away for that
long period of time and was afraid of falling ill in the jungle as he had done
in the Dominican Republic during the shooting of The Godfather Part II.[12]
Jack Nicholson, Robert Redford, and James Caan were approached to play either
Kurtz or Willard.[17] Coppola and Roos had been impressed by Martin Sheen's
screen test for Michael in The Godfather and he became their top choice to
play Willard but the actor had already accepted another project and Harvey
Keitel was cast in the role based on his work in Martin Scorsese's Mean
Streets.[18] By early 1976, Coppola had persuaded Marlon Brando to play Kurtz
for a then-unheard of fee - $3.5 million for a month's work on location in
September 1976. Dennis Hopper was cast as a kind of Green Beret sidekick for
Kurtz and when Coppola heard him talking nonstop on location, he remembered
putting "the cameras and the Montagnard shirt on him, and we shot the scene
where he greets them on the boat".[17]

### [edit] Principal photography

On March 1, 1976, Coppola and his family flew to Manila and rented a large
house there for the five-month shoot.[17] Sound and photographic equipment had
been coming in from California on a regular basis since late 1975. Principal
photography began three weeks later. Within a few days, Coppola was not happy
with Harvey Keitel's take on Willard, saying that the actor "found it
difficult to play him a passive onlooker".[17] After viewing early footage,
the director took a plane back to Los Angeles and replaced Keitel with Martin
Sheen.

Tropical rains wrecked the sets at Iba and on May 26, 1976, production was
closed down.[19] Dean Tavoularis remembers that it "started raining harder and
harder until finally it was literally white outside, and all the trees were
bent at forty-five degrees".[19] One part of the crew was stranded in a hotel
and the others were in small houses that were immobilized by the storm. The
Playboy Playmate set had been destroyed, ruining a month's shooting that had
been scheduled. Most of the cast and crew went back to the United States for
six to eight weeks. Tavoularis and his team stayed on to scout new locations
and rebuild the Playmate set in a different place. Also, the production had
bodyguards watching constantly at night and one day the entire payroll was
stolen. According to Coppola's wife, Eleanor, the film was six weeks behind
schedule and $2 million over budget.[19]

Coppola flew back to the U.S. in June 1976. He read a book about Genghis Khan
to get a better handle on the character of Kurtz.[19] After filming commenced,
Marlon Brando arrived in Manila very overweight and began working with Coppola
to rewrite the ending.[20] The director downplayed Brando's weight by dressing
him in black, photographing only his face, and having another, taller actor
double for him in an attempt to portray Kurtz as an almost mythical
character.[20]

In the days after Christmas 1976, Coppola viewed a rough assembly of the
footage he had to date but still needed to improvise an ending. He returned to
the Philippines in early 1977 and resumed filming.[20] On March 5, 1977, Sheen
had a heart attack and struggled for a quarter of a mile to reach help.[21] He
was back on the set on April 19. A major sequence in a French plantation cost
hundreds of thousands of dollars but was cut from the final film. Rumors began
to circulate that Apocalypse Now had several endings but Richard Beggs, who
worked on the sound elements, said, "There were never five endings, but just
the one, even if there were differently edited versions".[21] These rumors
came from Coppola departing frequently from the original screenplay. Coppola
admitted that he had no ending because Brando was too fat to play the scenes
as written in the original script. With the help of Dennis Jakob, Coppola
decided that the ending could be "the classic myth of the murderer who gets up
the river, kills the king, and then himself becomes the king - it's the Fisher
King, from The Golden Bough".[21]

A water buffalo was slaughtered with a machete for the climactic scene. The
scene was inspired by a ritual performed by a local Ifugao tribe which Coppola
had witnessed along with his wife (who filmed the ritual later shown in the
documentary Hearts of Darkness) and film crew. Although this was an American
production subject to American animal cruelty laws, scenes like this filmed in
the Philippines were not policed or monitored, and the American Humane
Association gave the film an "unacceptable" rating.[22] Principal photography
ended on May 21, 1977 and everyone headed home.[23]

### [edit] Post-production

In the summer of 1977, Coppola told Walter Murch that he had four months to
assemble the sound. Murch realized that the script had been narrated but
Coppola abandoned the idea during filming.[23] Murch thought that there was a
way to assemble the film without narration but it would take ten months and
decided to give it another try.[24] He put it back in, recording it all
himself.[25]

By September, Coppola told his wife that he felt "there is only about a 20%
chance [I] can pull the film off".[25] He convinced United Artists executives
to delay the premiere from May to October 1978. The Coppolas were facing a
crisis of their own as Francis, overwhelmed by the pressure of keeping
Apocalypse Now going, was infatuated with another woman.[25]

Author Michael Herr received a call from Zoetrope in January 1978 and was
asked to work on the film's narration based on his well-received journal about
Vietnam, Dispatches.[25] He said that the narration already written was
"totally useless" and spent a year writing various narrations with Coppola
giving him very definite guidelines.[25]

Murch had problems trying to make a quadraphonic soundtrack for Apocalypse Now
because sound libraries were devoid of any stereo recordings of any weapons
and, specifically, weapons used in Vietnam.[25] In addition, the sound
material brought back from the Philippines was inadequate because the small
location crew lacked time and resources sufficient to record jungle sounds and
ambient noises. Murch and his crew had to fabricate the mood of the jungle on
the soundtrack. Apocalypse Now would feature innovative sound technique for
movies as Murch insisted on recording the most up-to-date gunfire and employed
a quintuphonic soundtrack with three channels of sound behind the movie screen
and two channels of sound from behind the audience.[25]

On May 1978, Coppola decided that it would not be possible to finish the film
for a December release and postponed the opening until spring of 1979. He
screened a "work in progress" for 900 people in April 1979 that was not well-
received.[26] That same year, he was invited to screen Apocalypse Now at the
Cannes Film Festival.[27] United Artists were not keen on showing an
unfinished version in front of so many members of the press but Coppola
remembered that The Conversation won the Palme d'Or and agreed to show
Apocalypse Now at the festival less than a month before it began. The week
prior to Cannes, Coppola arranged three sneak previews that each featured
their own slightly different versions. He allowed critics to attend the
screenings and believed that they would honor the embargo placed on reviews.
On May 14, Rona Barrett reviewed the film on television and called it "a
disappointing failure".[27] At Cannes, Zoetrope technicians worked during the
night before the screening to install additional speakers on the theater walls
in order to achieve Murch's quadraphonic soundtrack.[27]

## [edit] Alternate versions

### [edit] Endings

At the time of its release, many rumors surrounded the ending of Apocalypse
Now. Coppola stated an ending was written in haste in which Willard and Kurtz
joined forces and repelled the air strike on the compound; however, Coppola
never fully agreed with the two going out in apocalyptic intensity, preferring
to end the film in a more encouraging manner.[citation needed]

When Coppola originally organized the ending of the movie, he had two choices.
One involved Willard leading Lance by the hand as everyone in Kurtz's base
throws down their weapons, and ends with images of Willard's boat pulling away
from Kurtz's compound superimposed over the face of a stone idol which then
fades into black. Another option showed an air strike being called and the
base being blown to bits in a spectacular display, consequently killing
everyone left at the base.

The original 1979 70 mm exclusive theatrical release ended with Willard's
boat, the stone statue, then fade to black with no credits, save for
'"Copyright 1979 Omni Zoetrope"' right after the film ends. This mirrors the
lack of any opening titles and supposedly stems from Coppola's original
intention to "tour" the film as one would a play: the credits would have
appeared on printed programs provided before the screening began.[28] For
general release in 35mm, Coppola elected to show the credits superimposed over
shots of Kurtz's base exploding.[28] Rental prints circulated with this
ending, and can be found in the hands of a few collectors. However, when
Coppola heard that audiences interpreted this as an air strike called by
Willard, Coppola pulled the film from its 35 mm run, and put credits on a
black screen. In the DVD commentary, Coppola explains that the images of
explosions had not been intended to be part of the story; they were intended
to be seen as completely separate from the film. He had added them to the
credits because he had captured the footage during the demolition of the set
in the Philippines, which was filmed with multiple cameras fitted with
different film stocks and lenses to capture the explosions at different
speeds.

Because of the confusion over the misinterpreted ending, there are multiple
slightly varying versions of the ending credits. Some TV screenings maintain
the explosion footage at the end, others do not, and there are several other
versions.

The first DVD of the theatrical version plays like the 70 mm version, without
beginning or ending credits, but has them on a separate part of the DVD. The
credits to Apocalypse Now Redux are different again: the credits play over a
black background, but with ambient music by the Rhythm Devils.

### [edit] Extended bootleg version

There is also a longer 289 minute version which circulates unofficially. It
has never been officially released but circulates as a video bootleg,
containing extra material not included in either the original theatrical
release or the "redux" version.[29]

A low-quality video transfer of a rough workprint, with a 330 minute running
time, is also available unofficially. [30]

### [edit] Apocalypse Now Redux

Main article: Apocalypse Now Redux

In 2001, Coppola released Apocalypse Now Redux in cinemas and subsequently on
DVD. This is an extended version that restores 53 minutes of scenes cut from
the original film. Coppola has continued to circulate the original version as
well: the two versions are packaged together in the Complete Dossier DVD,
released on August 15, 2006.

The most significant footage added in the Redux version is an anticolonialism
chapter involving the de Marais family's rubber plantation, a holdover from
the colonization of French Indochina, featuring Coppola's two sons Giancarlo
and Roman as children of the family. These scenes were removed from the 1979
cut, which premiered at Cannes. In behind-the-scenes footage in Hearts of
Darkness, Coppola expresses his anger, on the set, at the technical aspects of
the shot scenes, the result of tight allocation of resources. At the time of
the Redux version, it was possible to digitally-enhance the footage to
accomplish Coppola's vision. In the scenes, the French family patriarchs argue
about the positive side of colonialism in Indochina and denounce the betrayal
of the military men in the First Indochina War. Hubert de Marais argues that
French politicians sacrificed entire battalions at Äiá»n BiÃªn Phá»§, and
tells Willard that the US created the Viet Cong (as the Viet Minh), to fend
off Japanese invaders.

Other added material includes extra combat footage before Willard meets
Kilgore, a humorous scene in which Willard's team steals Kilgore's surfboard
(which sheds some light on the hunt for the mangoes), a follow-up scene to the
dance of the Playboy playmates, in which Willard's team finds the playmates
awaiting evacuation after their helicopter has run out of fuel, and a scene of
Kurtz reading from a Time magazine article about the war, surrounded by
Cambodian children.

There is a deleted scene entitled "Monkey Sampan" which was used as a way to
represent the whole movie in a three minute scene. The scene shows Willard and
the PBR crew suspiciously eyeing an approaching Sampan juxtaposed to
Montagnard villagers joyfully singing "Light My Fire" by The Doors. As the
Sampan gets closer Willard realizes there are Monkeys on it and no driver.
Finally just as the two boats pass, the wind turns the sail and exposes a
naked dead civilian tied to the sail boom. His body is mutilated and looks as
though the man was whipped. The singing stops. It is assumed the man was
tortured by the Viet Cong. As they pass on by, Chief notes out loud "That's
comin' from where we're going, Captain." The boat then slowly passes the giant
tail of a shot down B-52 bomber. The scene is ominous and the noise of engines
way up in the sky is heard. Coppola said that he made up for cutting this
scene by having the PBR pass under an airplane tail in the final cut.

## [edit] Reaction

### [edit] Cannes screening

A three-hour version of Apocalypse Now was screened as a "work in progress" at
the 1979 Cannes Film Festival and met with prolonged applause.[31] At the
subsequent press conference, Coppola criticized the media for attacking him
and the production during their problems filming in the Philippines and
uttered the famous quotes, "We had access to too much money, too much
equipment, and little by little we went insane", and "My film is not about
Vietnam, it is Vietnam".[31] The filmmaker upset newspaper critic Rex Reed who
reportedly stormed out of the conference. Apocalypse Now won the Palme d'Or
for best film along with Volker Schlondorff's The Tin Drum \- a decision that
was reportedly greeted with "some boos and jeers from the audience".[32]

### [edit] Box office

Apocalypse Now performed well at the box office when it opened in August
1979.[31] The film initially opened in one theater in New York City, Toronto,
and Hollywood, grossing USD $322,489 in the first five days. It ran
exclusively in these three locations for four weeks before opening in an
additional 12 theaters on October 3, 1979 and then several hundred the
following week.[33] The film grossed over $78 million domestically with a
worldwide total of approximately $150 million.[28]

The film was re-released on August 28, 1987 in six cities to capitalize on the
success of Platoon, Full Metal Jacket and other Vietnam War movies.[34] New
70mm prints were shown Los Angeles, San Francisco, San Jose, Seattle, St.
Louis, and Cincinnati - cities where the film did financially well in 1979.
The film was given the same kind of release as the exclusive engagement in
1979 with no logo or credits and audiences were given a printed program.[34]

### [edit] Critical response

In his original review, Roger Ebert wrote, "Apocalypse Now achieves greatness
not by analyzing our 'experience in Vietnam', but by re-creating, in
characters and images, something of that experience".[35] In his review for
the Los Angeles Times, Charles Champlin wrote, "as a noble use of the medium
and as a tireless expression of national anguish, it towers over everything
that has been attempted by an American filmmaker in a very long time".[33]

Ebert added Coppola's film to his list of Great Movies, stated: "Apocalypse
Now is the best Vietnam film, one of the greatest of all films, because it
pushes beyond the others, into the dark places of the soul. It is not about
war so much as about how war reveals truths we would be happy never to
discover".[36]

### [edit] Legacy

Today, the film is widely regarded as a masterpiece of the New Hollywood era.
It is on the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies list at number 28. Kilgore's quote
"I love the smell of napalm in the morning" was number 12 on the AFI's 100
Years... 100 Movie Quotes list. In 2002, Sight and Sound magazine polled
several critics to name the best film of the last 25 years and Apocalypse Now
was named number one. It was also listed as the second best war film by
viewers on Channel 4's 100 Greatest War Films, and ranked number 1 on Channel
4's 50 Films To See Before You Die. In a 2004 poll of UK film fans,
Blockbuster listed Kilgore's eulogy to napalm as the best movie speech.[37]
The helicopter attack to the song of Ride of the Valkyries was chosen as the
most memorable film scene ever by the Empire magazine.

## [edit] Awards and honors

Wins

  * Academy Award for Best Cinematography (Vittorio Storaro)
  * Academy Award for Best Sound (Walter Murch, Mark Berger, Richard Beggs, Nathan Boxer)
  * Cannes Film Festival: Palme d'Or
  * Golden Globe Award for Best Director (Francis Ford Coppola)
  * Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor (Robert Duvall)
  * Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score (Carmine Coppola & Francis Ford Coppola)

In 2000, Apocalypse Now was selected for preservation in the United States
National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally,
historically, or aesthetically significant".

Nominations

  * Academy Award for Best Picture
  * Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture â Drama
  * Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor â (Robert Duvall)
  * Academy Award for Best Art Direction â Set Decoration (Angelo P. Graham, George R. Nelson and Dean Tavoularis)
  * Academy Award for Directing (Francis Ford Coppola)
  * Academy Award for Film Editing (Lisa Fruchtman, Gerald B. Greenberg, Richard Marks and Walter Murch)
  * Best Writing, Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium (Francis Ford Coppola & John Milius)
  * WGA Award for Best Drama Written Directly for the Screen (John Milius & Francis Ford Coppola)
  * Grammy Award for Best Original Score Written for a Motion Picture (Carmine Coppola & Francis Ford Coppola)

American Film Institute recognition

  * 1998 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #28
  * 2005 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes: 
    * "I love the smell of napalm in the morning," #12
  * 2007 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #30

## [edit] Home video release aspect ratio issues

The first home video releases of Apocalypse Now were pan-and-scan versions of
the original 35 mm Technovision anamorphic 2.35:1 print, and the closing
credits, white on black background, were presented in compressed 1.33:1 full-
frame format to allow all credit information to be seen on standard
televisions. The first letterboxed appearance (on laserdisc on 12-29-1991)
cropped the film to a 2:1 aspect ratio (conforming to the Univisium spec
created by cinematographer Vittorio Storaro), featuring a small degree of pan-
and-scan processing - notably in the opening shots in Willard's hotel room,
featuring a composite montage - at the insistence of Coppola and Storaro. The
end credits, from a videotape source rather than a film print, were still
crushed for 1.33:1 and zoomed to fit the anamorphic video frame. All DVD
releases have maintained this aspect ratio in anamorphic widescreen, but
present the film without the end credits, which were treated as a separate
feature. As a DVD extra, the footage of the explosion of the Kurtz compound
was featured without text credits but included a commentary by director
Coppola explaining the various endings based on how the film was screened. On
the cover of the Redux DVD, Willard is erroneously listed as "Lieutenant
Willard".

## [edit] References

### [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Peary, Gerald. "Francis Ford Coppola, Interview with Gerald Peary". GeraldPeary.com. http://www.geraldpeary.com/interviews/abc/coppola.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-14.
  2. ^ Leary, William L. "Death of a Legend". Air America Archive. Retrieved on 2007-06-10.
  3. ^ Warner, Roger. Shooting at the Moon.
  4. ^ Ehrlich, Richard S. (2003-07-08). "CIA operative stood out in 'secret war' in Laos". Bangkok Post. http://www.geocities.com/asia_correspondent/laos0307ciaposhepnybp.html. Retrieved on 10 June 2007.
  5. ^ Cowie 2001, p. 19.
  6. ^ Heart of Darkness & Apocalypse Now: A comparative analysis of novella and film
  7. ^ Cowie 2001, p. 2.
  8. ^ a b c d e f g Cowie 1990, p. 120.
  9. ^ a b c d Cowie 2001, p.5.
  10. ^ Cowie 2001, p. 3.
  11. ^ Cowie 2001, p. 7.
  12. ^ a b c d e f Cowie 1990, p. 121.
  13. ^ a b Cowie 2001, p. 6.
  14. ^ Cowie 2001, p. 12.
  15. ^ Cowie 2001, p. 13.
  16. ^ Cowie 2001, p. 16.
  17. ^ a b c d Cowie 1990, p. 122.
  18. ^ Cowie 2001, p. 18.
  19. ^ a b c d Cowie 1990, p. 123.
  20. ^ a b c Cowie 1990, p. 124.
  21. ^ a b c Cowie 1990, p. 125.
  22. ^ "Movie Review: Apocalypse Now". http://www.ahafilm.info/movies/moviereviews.phtml?fid=7381. Retrieved on 2007-11-10.
  23. ^ a b Cowie 1990, p. 126.
  24. ^ Cowie 1990, pp. 126-127.
  25. ^ a b c d e f g Cowie 1990, p. 127.
  26. ^ Cowie 1990, p. 128.
  27. ^ a b c Cowie 1990, p. 129.
  28. ^ a b c Cowie 1990, p. 132.
  29. ^ Coates, Gordon (October 17, 2008). "Coppola's slow boat on the Nung". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2008/oct/17/1. Retrieved on 2008-10-17.
  30. ^ Sleeper, Light. "The Labour of Coppola's Twice-Born Film: The "Apocalypse Now Workprint"". http://www.lightsleepercinemag.com/reviews/apocalypsenowworkprint.php. Retrieved on 2009-04-03.
  31. ^ a b c Cowie 1990, p. 130.
  32. ^ "Sweeping Cannes". Time. June 4, 1979. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,946279,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-22.
  33. ^ a b Cowie 1990, p. 131.
  34. ^ a b Harmetz, Aljean (August 20, 1987). "Apocalypse Now to Be Re-released". New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9B0DE2D61F3BF933A1575BC0A961948260&scp=4&sq=%22Apocalypse+Now%22&st=nyt. Retrieved on 2008-11-24.
  35. ^ Ebert, Roger (June 1, 1979). "Apocalypse Now". Chicago Sun-Times. http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/19790601/REVIEWS/41214002/1023. Retrieved on 2008-11-24.
  36. ^ Ebert, Roger (November 28, 1999). "Great Movies: Apocalypse Now". Chicago Sun-Times. http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/19991128/REVIEWS08/911280301/1023. Retrieved on 2008-11-24.
  37. ^ 'Napalm' speech tops movie poll, 2 January, 2004, BBC News, accessed 18 February, 2008

### [edit] Bibliography

  * Cowie, Peter (1990) Coppola. New York: Da Capo Press. ISBN 0306805987
  * Cowie, Peter (2001) "The Apocalypse Now Book. New York: Da Capo Press.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Apocalypse
Now  
  * Apocalypse Now at the Internet Movie Database
  * Apocalypse Now at Allmovie
  * Apocalypse Now at the TCM Movie Database
  * Apocalypse Now at Box Office Mojo
  * Apocalypse Now at Rotten Tomatoes
  * Apocalypse Now at Filmsite.org

  

Awards  
Preceded by  
The Tree of Wooden Clogs Palme d'Or  
1979  
tied with The Tin Drum Succeeded by  
All That Jazz  
tied with Kagemusha  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Francis Ford Coppola  
1960s

Dementia 13 (1963) Â· You're a Big Boy Now (1966) Â· Finian's Rainbow (1968)
Â· The Rain People (1969)  
1970s

The Godfather (1972) Â· The Conversation (1974) Â· The Godfather Part II
(1974) Â· Apocalypse Now (1979)  
1980s

One from the Heart (1982) Â· The Outsiders (1983) Â· Rumble Fish (1983) Â· The
Cotton Club (1984) Â· Peggy Sue Got Married (1986) Â· Gardens of Stone (1987)
Â· Tucker: The Man and His Dream (1988)  
1990s

The Godfather Part III (1990) Â· Dracula (1992) Â· Jack (1996) Â· The
Rainmaker (1997)  
2000s

Youth Without Youth (2007) Â· Tetro (2009)  
Shorts

Captain EO (1986) Â· Life Without Zoe (1989)  
Credits

Patton (Writer, 1970)  Â· THX 1138 (Executive Producer, 1971)  Â· American
Graffiti (Producer, 1973)  Â· The Great Gatsby (Writer, 1974)  Â· The Black
Stallion (film) (Executive Producer, 1979)  Â· Kagemusha (Executive Producer:
International Version, 1980)  Â· Hammett (Producer, 1982)  Â· Koyaanisqatsi
(Producer, 1982)  Â· The Black Stallion Returns (Executive Producer, 1983)  Â·
Mishima: A Life in Four Chapters (Producer, 1985)  Â· Tough Guys Don't Dance
(Executive Producer, 1987)  Â· Lionheart (1987, Executive Producer)  Â·
Powaqqatsi (Executive Producer, 1989)  Â· Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker's
Apocalypse (appearance, 1991)  Â· The Junky's Christmas (Producer, 1993) Â·
Frankenstein (Producer, 1994) Â· Don Juan DeMarco (Producer, 1995) Â· Lani Loa
(Producer, 1998) Â· The Florentine (Producer, 1999)  Â· The Virgin Suicides
(Producer, 1999)  Â· Sleepy Hollow (Producer, 1999)  Â· Jeepers Creepers
(Executive Producer, 2001)  Â· Lost in Translation (2003, Executive Producer)
Â· Jeepers Creepers II (Executive Producer, 2003)  Â· Kinsey (Executive
Producer, 2004)  Â· The Good Shepherd (Exective Producer, 2006)  Â· Marie
Antoinette (Executive Producer, 2006)  
Enterprises

American Zoetrope Â· Zoetrope: All-Story Â· Rubicon Estate Winery Â· Francis
Ford Coppola Presents  
Family

Francis Ford Coppola Â· Eleanor Coppola Â· Anton Coppola Â· Carmine Coppola Â·
Italia Coppola Â· Gian-Carlo Coppola Â· Sofia Coppola Â· Thomas Mars Â· Roman
Coppola Â· Talia Coppola Â· David Shire Â· Jack Schwartzman Â· Robert
Schwartzman Â· Jason Schwartzman Â· John Schwartzman Â· Marc Coppola Â·
Christopher Coppola Â· Nicolas Cage  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apocalypse_Now"

Categories: American films | 1979 films | Epic films | Adventure drama films |
English-language films | French-language films | Vietnamese-language films |
Khmer-language films | War films | Road movies | Existentialist works | Films
based on short fiction | Films directed by Francis Ford Coppola | Films
featuring a Best Supporting Actor Golden Globe winning performance | Films
shot anamorphically | Films whose cinematographer won the Best Cinematography
Academy Award | Films whose director won the Best Director Golden Globe |
Palme d'Or winners | United Artists films | United States National Film
Registry films | Vietnam War films | War epic films

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since October 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 23:41.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



