
# Cyanotype

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Anna Atkins algae

Cyanotype is a photographic printing process that gives a cyan-blue print.

The English scientist and astronomer Sir John Herschel discovered this
procedure in 1842. Even though John Herschel is perhaps the inventor of the
cyanotype process, Anna Atkins actually brought this to photography. She
created a limited series of cyanotype books that documented ferns and other
plant life. By using this process, Anna Atkins is regarded as the first female
photographer.

The process uses two chemicals:

  * Ammonium iron(III) citrate
  * Potassium ferricyanide

They result in a photo-sensitive solution when dissolved in water, which is
used to coat a material (usually paper). A positive image can be produced by
exposing it to a source of ultraviolet light (such as sunlight) with a
negative. The UV light reduces the iron(III) to iron(II). This is followed by
a complex reaction of the iron(II) complex with ferricyanide. The result is an
insoluble, blue dye (ferric ferrocyanide) known as Prussian blue.

The developing of the picture takes place by flushing it with flowing water.
The water-soluble iron(III) salts are washed away, while the non-water-soluble
Prussian blue remains in the paper. This is what gives the picture its typical
blue color. The process was popular in engineering circles well into the 20th
century. The simple and low-cost process enabled them to produce large-scale
copies of their work, referred to as blueprints.

## Contents

  * 1 The process
  * 2 Long-term preservation
  * 3 References
  * 4 External links

  
## [edit] The process

In a typical procedure, equal volumes of an 8% (w/v) solution of potassium
ferricyanide and a 20% solution of ferric ammonium citrate are mixed. This
mildly photosensitive solution is then applied to a receptive surface (such as
paper) and allowed to dry in a dark place. Cyanotypes can be printed on any
surface capable of soaking up the iron solution. Although watercolor paper is
a preferred medium, cotton, wool and even gelatin sizing on nonporous surfaces
have been used. Care should be taken to avoid alkaline-buffered papers which
will cause degradation of the image over time.

Upon exposure to ultraviolet light (such as that in sunlight), the iron in the
exposed areas will reduce, turning the paper a steel-grey-blue color. The
extent of color change is dependent on the amount of UV light, but acceptable
results are usually obtained after 10-20 minute exposures on a bright, sunny
day. The highlight values should appear overexposed as the water wash will
reduce the final print values. Prints can be made with large format negatives
and lithography film, or everyday objects can be used to make photograms.

After exposure, the yellow, unreacted iron solution is rinsed off with running
water. Although the blue color darkens upon drying, the effect can be
accelerated by soaking the print in a 6% (v/v) solution of 3% (household)
hydrogen peroxide.

The overall contrast of the sensitizer solution can be increased with the
addition of 1% (w/v) solution potassium dichromate. Approximately 6 drops for
every 2ml of sensitizer solution.

## [edit] Long-term preservation

In contrast to most historical and present-day processes, cyanotype prints do
not like basic environments. So it is not a good idea to store or present the
print in chemically buffered museum board. This will cause the image to fade.
Another unusual characteristic of the cyanotype is its regenerative behaviour:
prints that have faded due to prolonged exposure to light can often be
significantly restored to their original tone by simply temporarily storing
them in a dark environment.

## [edit] References

  * Atkins, Anna, with text by Larry J. Schaaf. Sun Gardens: Victorian Photograms. New York; Aperture, 1985.
  * Blacklow, Laura. (2000) New Dimensions in Photo Processes: a step by step manual. 3rd ed.
  * Ware, M. (1999) Cyanotype: the history, science and art of photographic printing in Prussian blue. Science Museum, UK
  * Crawford, William. The Keepers of Light New York; Morgan And Morgan, 1979.

## [edit] External links

  * [http://www.BlueprintsOnFabric.com \- Online Shop for Cyanotype Fabric, Paper, Chemicals and more. Gallery of cyanotype art.
  * Mike Ware's New Cyanotype \- a new version of the cyanotype that address some of the classical cyanotype's short comings
  * Cyanotypes.com - a free information centre with articles and galleries on the cyanotype process
  * Skobeeva.net - artist specialising in cyanotype and other photographic processes

v â¢ d â¢ e

Photography  
Technical terms

Angle of view Â· Aperture Â· Color temperature Â· Depth of field Â· Depth of
focus Â· Exposure Â· F-number Â· Film format Â· Film speed Â· Focal length Â·
Perspective distortion Â· Photograph Â· Photographic printing Â· Photographic
processes Â· Red-eye effect Â· Science of photography Â· Shutter speed Â· Zone
system  
Genres

Aerial Â· Commercial Â· Cloudscape Â· Documentary Â· Erotic Â· Fashion Â· Fine
art Â· Forensic Â· Glamour Â· Nature Â· Nude Â· Photojournalism Â· Pornography
Â· Portrait Â· Post-mortem Â· Senior Â· Still life Â· Stock Â· Street Â·
Vernacular Â· Underwater Â· Wedding Â· Wildlife  
Techniques

Bokeh Â· Contre-jour Â· Cross processing Â· Cyanotype Â· Digiscoping Â· Film
developing Â· Fireworks Â· Harris Shutter Â· Kite aerial Â· Macro Â· Multiple
exposure Â· Night Â· Panoramic Â· Panning Â· Photogram (Kirlian) Â· Print
toning Â· Push printing Â· Rephotography Â· Rollout Â· Sabatier Effect Â·
Stereoscopy Â· Stopping Down Â· Sun printing Â· Infrared Â· Ultraviolet Â·
Time-lapse Â· Tilt-shift  
Composition

Geometry and symmetry Â· Framing Â· Lead room Â· Rule of thirds Â· Simplicity  
Equipment

Camera (Pinhole Â· SLR Â· Still Â· TLR Â· Toy Â· View) Â· Darkroom (Enlarger
Â· Safelight) Â· Film (Base Â· Format Â· Holder Â· Stock) Â· Filter Â· Flash
Â· Manufacturers Â· Movie projector Â· Photographic lens Â· Slide projector Â·
Tripod Â· Zone plate  
History

Autochrome LumiÃ¨re Â· Daguerreotype Â· Dufaycolor Â· Timeline of photographic
technology  
Digital photography

Digital camera (D-SLR Â· Digital back)  Â· Photo sharing Â· Digital and film
compared Â· Image sensor Â· (Three-CCD Â· Foveon X3) Â· Pixel Â· Film scanner  
Color photography

Color Â· Color management (Color space Â· Primary color Â· RGB Â· CMYK)  Â·
Color film (Print Â· Slide)  
Other topics

Camera obscura Â· Gelatin-silver process Â· Gum printing Â· Holography Â·
Lomography Â· Photography and the law Â· Photography museums and galleries
(category) Â· Print permanence Â· Vignetting Â· Visual arts  
List of photographers Â· List of most expensive photographs  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyanotype"

Categories: Photographic processes

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 19:31.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



