
# Zatoichi

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Zatoichi (åº§é ­å¸ ,ZatÅichi?) is a fictional character featured in one of
Japan's longest running series of films and a television series set in the Edo
period. The character, a blind masseur and swordmaster, was created by
novelist Kan Shimozawa (å­æ¯æ¾¤ å¯ ,Shimozawa Kan?). This originally minor
character was developed for the screen by Daiei Studios and actor Shintaro
Katsu, who created the screen version. A total of 26 films were made from 1962
to 1989. From 1972 to 1974, a television series of the same name was made. One
hundred twelve episodes were aired before the "Zatoichi" television series was
cancelled.[1]

Film number 17 of the original series was remade in America in 1990 (by
TriStar Pictures) as Blind Fury, an action movie starring Rutger Hauer.

More recently, Takeshi Kitano directed and starred in a 2003 Zatoichi movie.
Sho Aikawa also starred in a stage version of Zatoichi, directed by Takashi
Miike[1].

## Contents

  * 1 Character
  * 2 The original series of films
    * 2.1 List of original films
  * 3 The television series
  * 4 Production companies
  * 5 The parodies
  * 6 In other works
  * 7 The 2003 film
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Character

Zatoichi at first appears to be a harmless blind anma ("masseur") who wanders
around the country, making his living by gambling as well as giving massages,
performing acupuncture, singing and playing music; however, he is also highly-
skilled in swordsmanship, specifically iaido and is equally skilled in the
general sword skills of Japan, as well as Sumo wrestling.

He does not carry a traditional katana, instead using a well-made shikomi-zue
(cane sword), as blades were outlawed in the Edo period. Shikomi-tzue were
generally straight-edged, lower-quality blades which could not compare with
regular katana, but as revealed in Zatoichi's Cane Sword, his weapon is
superior as it was forged by a master bladesmith.

A recurring theme of the films and television series is Zatoichi protecting
the innocent from oppressive or warring yakuza gangs, and
investigating/stopping general injustice. His fighting skill is incredible,
with his sword-grip in inverse manner; this, combined with his keen ear and
sense of smell and proprioception, renders him a frightening opponent. He is
quite capable with a traditional katana, as seen in Zatoichi's Vengeance.
Similarly, he displays considerable skill using two swords simultaneously, in
Musashi-like NitÅ Ichi style in Zatoichi and the Doomed Man.

A number of standard scenarios are repeated through the series: Zatoichi's
winning large amounts at gambling via his ability to hear whether the dice
have fallen even or odd is a common theme, as is his catching loaded or
substituted dice by the difference in their sound. This frequently culminates
in another set piece, Zatoichi's cutting the candles lighting the room and
reducing it to pitch blackness, commonly accompanied by his tag line "Kurayami
nara kocchi no mo nda" (æéãªããã£ã¡ã®ããã  ,lit. Darkness is my
advantage?).

The character's name is actually Ichi. ZatÅ is a title, the lowest of the
four official ranks within the TÅdÅza, the historical guild for blind men.
(Thus zato is also Japanese slang for a blind person.) Ichi is therefore
properly called ZatÅ-no-Ichi ("Low-Ranking Blind Person Ichi",
approximately), or ZatÅichi for short. It is also a play on words: "Sa" or
"za" is a combinative word for "master"; "to" is likewise for "sword"; and
"ichi" means "one"; therefore, an alternate translation might read "First
Sword Master", or perhaps "Master of the Unique Sword Style". Giving massages
was a traditional occupation for the blind, since blind persons and masseurs
were on the lowest social level, no better than beggars because in Japan it
was common to think of the blind as also being retarded or perverted.

## [edit] The original series of films

The original series of 26 films featured Shintaro Katsu as Zatoichi. The first
film was made in 1962 in black and white. The third film, in 1963, was the
first to be filmed in color. The twenty-fifth film was made in 1973, and there
was a pause of some 16 years before Katsu's last film, in 1989, which he wrote
and directed himself.

The original series of movies features other popular fictional characters of
the genre on two occasions: Zatoichi and the One Armed Swordsman (1971)
connects with the Shaw Brothers series of Hong Kong produced movies directed
by prolific director Chang Cheh.

Zatoichi Meets Yojimbo (1970) features a guest star, Toshiro Mifune playing a
character named Sassa Daisakka who, despite the title, bears slight
resemblance to the title character of Akira Kurosawa's hit films Yojimbo (lit.
"bodyguard") and Sanjuro. The earlier films, in which Mifune's character used
the pseudonym Sanjuro (thirty-year-old), are alluded to when Sassa is jokingly
called Shijuro (forty-year-old).

The series has also had wide spread influences on non-Japanese films. The 1989
film Blind Fury featuring Rutger Hauer as a blind swordsman in contemporary
America is based on Zatoichi Challenged (1967, the 17th film in the series of
26).

Zatoichi is one of several fictional blind heroes with superhuman fighting
skills, and while predated by such American characters as the pulp fiction and
comic book heroes The Black Bat and Doctor Mid-Nite respectively, is followed
by the likes of Daredevil. The 1970s television series Kung Fu also featured
the blind Shaolin priest Master Po (played by Keye Luke).

### [edit] List of original films

No. Title Year Japanese Romanization Director  
1 The Tale of Zatoichi 1962 åº§é ­å¸ç©èª ZatÅichi monogatari Kenji Misumi  
2 The Tale of Zatoichi Continues ç¶ã»åº§é ­å¸ç©èª Zoku ZatÅichi
monogatari Kazuo Mori  
3 New Tale of Zatoichi 1963 æ°ã»åº§é ­å¸ç©èª Shin ZatÅichi monogatari
Tokuzo Tanaka  
4 The Fugitive åº§é ­å¸å ç¶æ  ZatÅichi kyÅjÅ-tabi  
5 On The Road åº§é ­å¸å§å©æ  ZatÅichi kenka-tabi Kimiyoshi Yasuda  
6 Zatoichi and the Chest of Gold 1964 åº§é ­å¸åä¸¡é¦ ZatÅichi
senryÅ-kubi Kazuo Ikehiro  
7 Zatoichi's Flashing Sword åº§é ­å¸ãã°ãå§ ZatÅichi abare tako  
8 Fight, Zatoichi, Fight åº§é ­å¸è¡ç¬æ  ZatÅichi kesshÅ-tabi Kenji
Misumi  
9 Adventures of Zatoichi åº§é ­å¸é¢æç ´ã ZatÅichi sekisho-yaburi
Kimiyoshi Yasuda  
10 Zatoichi's Revenge 1965 åº§é ­å¸äºæ®µæ¬ã ZatÅichi nidan-giri Akira
Inoue  
11 Zatoichi and the Doomed Man åº§é ­å¸éææ¬ã ZatÅichi sakate-giri
Kazuo Mori  
12 Zatoichi and the Chess Expert åº§é ­å¸å°çæ  ZatÅichi jigoku-tabi
Kenji Misumi  
13 Zatoichi's Vengeance 1966 åº§é ­å¸ã®æ­ãèãã ZatÅichi no uta ga
kikoeru Tokuzo Tanaka  
14 Zatoichi's Pilgrimage åº§é ­å¸æµ·ãæ¸¡ã ZatÅichi umi o wataru Kazuo
Ikehiro  
15 Zatoichi's Cane Sword 1967 åº§é ­å¸éç«æ  ZatÅichi tekka-tabi
Kimiyoshi Yasuda  
16 Zatoichi the Outlaw åº§é ­å¸ç¢ç ´ã ZatÅichi rÅyaburi Satsuo Yamamoto  
17 Zatoichi Challenged åº§é ­å¸è¡ç ãè¡é ZatÅichi chikemurikaidÅ
Kenji Misumi  
18 Zatoichi and the Fugitives 1968 åº§é ­å¸æãç¶ ZatÅichi hatashijÅ
Kimiyoshi Yasuda  
19 Samaritan Zatoichi åº§é ­å¸å§å©å¤ªé¼ ZatÅichi kenka-daiko Kenji Misumi  
20 Zatoichi Meets Yojimbo 1970 åº§é ­å¸ã¨ç¨å¿æ£ ZatÅichi to YÅjinbÅ
Kihachi Okamoto  
21 Zatoichi, The Festival Of Fire åº§é ­å¸ãã°ãç«ç¥­ã ZatÅichi abare-
himatsuri Kenji Misumi  
22 Zatoichi Meets the One Armed Swordsman 1971 æ°åº§é ­å¸ã»ç
´ãï¼åäººå£ Shin ZatÅichi: Yabure! TÅjin-ken Kimiyoshi Yasuda  
23 Zatoichi at Large 1972 åº§é ­å¸å¾¡ç¨æ  ZatÅichi goyÅ-tabi Kazuo Mori  
24 Zatoichi in Desperation æ°åº§é ­å¸ç©èªã»æããæ Shin ZatÅichi
monogatari: Orieta tsue ShintarÅ Katsu  
25 Zatoichi's Conspiracy 1973 æ°åº§é ­å¸ç©èªã»ç¬ éã®è¡ç¥­ã Shin
ZatÅichi monogatari: Kasama no chimatsuri Kimiyoshi Yasuda  
26 Zatoichi, Darkness Is His Ally 1989 åº§é ­å¸ ZatÅichi ShintarÅ Katsu  
Notes:

  * The English title is not a direct translation of the Japanese title.

## [edit] The television series

The television series of Zatoichi ran for four seasons, with Shintaro Katsu in
the lead role:

  1. 26 episodes, in 1974
  2. 29 episodes, in 1976
  3. 19 episodes, in 1978
  4. 26 episodes, in 1979

See also: List of Zatoichi episodes

## [edit] Production companies

The majority of the films were produced by Daiei Motion Picture Company: from
the first film, Zatoichi's Story (wrongly translated as all the titles are, as
The Tale of Zatoichi a/k/a The Life and Opinions of Masseur Ichi), to the 19th
film, Zatoichi Samaritan. Toho Studios picked up where it had left off-- the
16th film, Zatoichi the Outlaw-- with the 20th film, Zatoichi and Yojimbo. The
22nd film, Zatoichi Meets the One Armed Swordsman, was released in 1971-- the
year Daiei Studios went bankrupt. It was just as well Toho had taken over
production with the 20th film (Zatoichi and Yojimbo) in the series.

However, starting with film entry 16, Zatoichi the Outlaw in 1967, Shintaro
Katsu's own company, Katsu Productions, coproduced the films (as well as
producing the TV series and his last Zatoichi film). After Daiei was out of
commission, Toho Company took over the films as stated, including 1972's
highly popular Zatoichi at Large, the 23rd film, through to Zatoichi at the
Blood Fest in 1973, the 25th film. Shochiku did Katsu's last Zatoichi film in
1989, which was produced by Katsu Productions. It was re-released (and
retitled Darkness Is His Ally) in 2004; this was no doubt sparked by the new
2003 Zatoichi film, Zatoichi, starring Takeshi Kitano, which Shochiku also
released.

Chambara Entertainment/Video Action of Honolulu held the original VHS release
rights to the Zatoichi film series numbers 1-20, though it only released some
of them. Chambara eventually expired its North American release license.
AnimEigo held the remainder of the VHS rights.[2]

Home Vision Entertainment (not Criterion as is often misstated) was granted
United States distribution rights to the original Daiei films (except for the
14th, and the 16th was in possession of AnimEigo), and released them on DVD:
films numbered 1-13, 15, and 17-19. AnimEigo released seven of the films:
Zatoichi the Outlaw (1967), Zatoichi Meets Yojimbo (1970), Zatoichi at the
Fire Festival (1970, as Zatoichi: The Festival of Fire), Zatoichi Meets the
One Armed Swordsman (1971), Zatoichi at Large (1972), Zatoichi in Desperation
(1972), and Zatoichi at the Blood Fest (1973, as Zatoichi's Conspiracy). More
than a few of these titles are somewhat questionable as to actual year of
original production.

Media Blasters (under their Tokyo Shock label) has released the 1989 film and
(as of February 7, 2007) the first season (26 episodes) of the TV series.

At the present time, all DVD release rights except for the 26th film have been
revoked or lapsed; it is unknown who presently holds the American release
rights, if anyone. AnimEigo and HVE both lost their DVD release rights.[3]
However, as stated, Media Blasters holds DVD release rights to the last film
of the Zatoichi series, re-released in 2003 as "Darkness Is His Ally", as well
as the entire television series. It is possible Media Blasters is negotiating
for the DVD rights to the entire film series.

## [edit] The parodies

In Yellowbeard (1983), the character Harvey "Blind" Pew (John Cleese) is a
Zatoichi homage.

Takeshi Kitano did a brief parody of the character in his 1999 film Kikujiro,
which was a 'double remake': of the 1986 film Dutch and one of the original
Zatoichi films.[citation needed]

In The Wicked Priest (1968), the first of a series of 5 films, Katsu's brother
Tomisaburo Wakayama does a spoof of Zatoichi.

## [edit] In other works

The character of Zatoichi finds homage in the character of Zato-Ino (also
known as "the Blind Swordspig") in Stan Sakai's long-running anthropomorphic
comic series Usagi Yojimbo. This iteration of the character uses his keen
sense of smell to find his way and to combat his enemies.

The Crimson Bat film series was an unauthorized variation, with a blind woman
named O-Ichi, played by Yoko Matsuyama, as the sword-wielding hero. This
series of films was not well received; only three films were produced and the
producers were chastised for stealing from the Ichi character.

Blindman was a spaghetti western variation on the Zatoichi formula starring
Tony Anthony as a blind gunman.

The 1989 movie Blind Fury starring Rutger Hauer was inspired by "Zatoichi
Challenged", the 17th film in the series. In this movie Hauer plays a blind
Vietnam War veteran trained to use a sword cane in battle, thus giving his
remake character a more American background.

The anime Ninja Scroll also contained an homage to this character, Utsutsu
Mushuru, one of the 8 Devils of Kimon. He was a blind samurai who at the
height of his battle with the main character, used his sword to blind his
opponent. He was slain, yet was one of the few Devils of Kimon to show honor
in battle.

In the episode of The Boondocks television series "Granddad's Fight", Huey
trains his grandfather believing his blind opponent, Colonel Stinkmeaner (who
uses his cane as a weapon), is a master of martial arts like Zatoichi, even
making his granddad watch some ultra-violent scenes from the movies to
demonstrate his point. Huey comes to this revelation in a dream in which he
fights Stinkmeaner who appears in samurai garb in the likeness of Zatoichi,
and whom Huey refers to "The Blind Nigga' Samurai".

A character called Zato-1 appears in the first two installments of the
fighting video game series Guilty Gear; he uses a parasitic beast to gain
powers, at the cost of his sight. His name is a pun: the number 1 can be
pronounced ichi in Japanese.

At the very end of the film Resident Evil: Extinction, a sign reading
"Zatoichi Square" is seen in devastated and zombie-infested Tokyo.

In Quentin Tarantino's 2007 film, Death Proof, Jungle Julia Lucai calls
Stuntman Mike "Zatoichi" for not having seen a billboard clearly in his line
of sight.

The 2008 film Ichi features a blind female musician who is also a skilled
swordswoman.

In the movie Gekitotsu! Satsujin ken (The Street Fighter, 1974) the antagonist
is blind and carries a cane sword.

## [edit] The 2003 film

<IMG>

<IMG>

Zatoichi (2003)

For more details on this topic, see Zatoichi (2003 film).

In 2003, Takeshi Kitano wrote, directed and appeared in a new high-budget
Zatoichi film, called simply Zatoichi (åº§é ­å¸ ZatÅichi).

In this remake, Zatoichi discovers a small, remote mountain town that has been
overtaken by a bullying gang that is extorting money from the townspeople. As
Zatoichi seeks to liberate the town, he encounters a ronin seeking employment
to pay for his ailing wife's needs, and two geisha who are seeking to avenge
the murder of their parents, but he soon discovers they are not what they seem
to be.

The soundtrack features contributions from Keiichi Suzuki (formerly of the
Moon Riders) and The Stripes.

## [edit] See also

  * Samurai cinema
  * Bakuto
  * Cho-han bakuchi

## [edit] References

  1. ^ http://www.tokyograph.com/news/id-1452>

## [edit] External links

  * Zatoichi (2003) at the Internet Movie Database
  * Zatoichi's Musical Journey (CDs of the original film music) - Volumes 1 2 and 3
  * The Momii Company's Zatoichi siteâa commercial site selling Zatoichi on VHS and DVD, with good information on the series
  * The Digital Bits' DVD Review Index - Zatoichi: The Blind Swordsman on DVD
  * Zatoichi No Eigamonoâsynopses of the first sixteen Zatoichi films
  * Zatoichi region 2 disc mix-upâreview of the infamous Artsmagic box set
  * Rev. Antonio Hernandez's two-part history of Zatoichi: [4], [5]

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zatoichi"

Categories: 2003 films | Fictional blind characters | Fictional Japanese
swordsmen | Japanese films | Jidaigeki films | Yakuza films | Fictional
iaidouka

Hidden categories: Articles containing Japanese language text | All articles
with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March
2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 26 March 2009, at 01:21.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



