
# Product placement

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the album by DJ Shadow and Cut Chemist, see Product Placement (album).

Marketing  
Key concepts  
Product / Pricing / Promotion  
Distribution / Service / Retail  
Brand management  
Account-based marketing  
Marketing effectiveness  
Market research  
Marketing strategy  
Marketing management  
Market dominance  
  
Promotional content  
Advertising / Branding  
Direct marketing / Personal Sales  
Product placement / Public relations  
Publicity / Sales promotion  
Sex in advertising / Underwriting  
Promotional media  
Printing / Publication / Broadcasting  
Out-of-home / Internet marketing  
Point of sale / Novelty items  
Digital marketing / In-game  
Word of mouth  
  
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
Product placement, or embedded marketing,[1][2][3][4] is a form of
advertisement, where branded goods or services are placed in a context usually
devoid of ads, such as movies, the story line of television shows, or news
programs. The product placement is often not disclosed at the time that the
good or service is featured.

In April 2006, Broadcasting & Cable reported, "Two thirds of advertisers
employ 'branded entertainment'--product placement--with the vast majority of
that (80%) in commercial TV programming." The story, based on a survey by the
Association of National Advertisers, added, "Reasons for using in-show plugs
varied from 'stronger emotional connection' to better dovetailing with
relevant content, to targetting a specific group."[5][6]

## Contents

  * 1 Early examples
  * 2 Categories and variations
  * 3 Measuring effectiveness
  * 4 Consumer response and economic impact
  * 5 Products
    * 5.1 Automobiles
    * 5.2 Consumer electronics and computers
    * 5.3 Food and drink
    * 5.4 Travel
    * 5.5 Tobacco
  * 6 Radio and television
    * 6.1 Reality TV
    * 6.2 Public and educational television
    * 6.3 TV programmes
    * 6.4 Payola and legal considerations
    * 6.5 Music and recording industries
  * 7 Extreme and unusual examples
    * 7.1 Overkill
    * 7.2 Self-criticism
    * 7.3 Faux product placement and parodies
    * 7.4 Reverse placement
    * 7.5 Virtual placement
  * 8 Product displacement
  * 9 Further reading
  * 10 References

  
## [edit] Early examples

Product placement became common in the 1980s, but can be traced back to the
nineteenth century in publishing. By the time he published the adventure
novel, Around the World in Eighty Days the French writer Jules Verne was a
world-renowned literary giant to the extent transport and shipping companies
lobbied to be mentioned in the story as it was published in serial
form.[citation needed] Product placement is still used in books to some
extent, particularly in novels.

Possibly the first film to feature product placement was Wings (released in
1927), the first film to win the Oscar for Best Picture. It contained a plug
for Hershey's chocolate.

Another early example in film occurs in the 1932 film Horse Feathers where
Thelma Todd falls out of a canoe and into a river. She calls for a life saver
and Groucho Marx tosses her the Life Savers candy. Yet again, another of the
Marx Brothers, in the 1949 film Love Happy, Harpo Marx cavorts on a rooftop
among various billboards and at one point escapes from the villains on the old
Mobil logo, the "Flying Red Horse".

The 1946 film It's a Wonderful Life by Frank Capra depicts a young boy with
aspirations to be an explorer, displaying a prominent copy of National
Geographic.

Still another example is the conspicuous display of Studebaker motor vehicles
in the television show Mr. Ed, which was sponsored by the Studebaker
Corporation from 1961 to 1963.

In other early media, e.g. radio in the 1930s and 1940s and early television
in the 1950s, programs were often underwritten by companies. "Soap operas" are
called such because they were initially underwritten by consumer packaged
goods companies such as Procter & Gamble or Unilever. When television began to
displace radio, DuMont's Cavalcade of Stars was in its era notable for not
relying a sole sponsor in the tradition of NBC's Texaco Star Theater and
similar productions. Sponsorship still exists today with programs being
sponsored by major vendors such as Hallmark.

Incorporation of products into the actual plot of a TV show is generally
called "brand integration". A recent example is HBO's Sex and the City, where
the plot revolved around, among other things, Absolut Vodka, a campaign upon
which one of the protagonists was working, and a billboard in Times Square,
where a bottle prevented an image of the model from being pornographic. Knight
Rider, a TV series featuring a talking Pontiac Trans Am, is another example of
brand integration.

The earliest example of product placement in a computer or video game occurs
in the 1984 game Action Biker for KP's Skips crisps. Video games, such as
Crazy Taxi feature real retail stores as game destinations. However, sometimes
the economics are reversed and video game makers pay for the rights to use
real sports teams and players. Today, product placement in online-video is
also becoming common. Online agencies are specializing in connecting online-
video producers, which are usually individuals, with brands and advertisers.

## [edit] Categories and variations

Actual product placement falls into two categories: products or locations that
are obtained from manufacturers or owners to reduce the cost of production,
and products deliberately placed into productions in exchange for fees.[7]

Sometimes, product usage is negotiated rather than paid for. Some placements
provide productions with below-the-line savings, with products such as props,
clothes and cars being loaned for the production's use, thereby saving them
purchase or rental fees. Barter systems (the director/actor/producer wants one
for himself) and service deals (cellular phones provided for crew use, for
instance) are also common practices. Producers may also seek out companies for
product placements as another savings or revenue stream for the movie, with,
for example, products used in exchange for help funding advertisements tied-in
with a film's release, a show's new season or other event.

A variant of product placement is advertisement placement. In this case an
advertisement for the product (rather than the product itself) is seen in the
movie or television series. Examples include a Lucky Strike cigarette
advertisement on a billboard or a truck with a milk advertisement on its
trailer.

Another variant is the widespread use of promotional consideration in which a
television game show would award an advertiser's product as a prize or
consolation prize in return for a subsidy from the product's manufacturer.

## [edit] Measuring effectiveness

Quantification methods track brand integrations, with both basic quantitative
and more demonstrative qualitative systems used to determine the cost and
effective media value of a placement. Rating systems measure the type of
placement and on-screen exposure is gauged by audience recall rates. Products
might be featured but hardly identifiable, clearly identifiable, long or
recurrent in exposure, associated with a main character, verbally mentioned
and/or they may play a key role in the storyline. Media values are also
weighed over time, depending on a specific product's degree of presence in the
market.

## [edit] Consumer response and economic impact

As with any advertising, its effectiveness tends to be proven by the fact that
advertisers continue to use product placement as a marketing strategy.
However, some consumer groups such as Commercial Alert object to the practice
as "an affront to basic honesty",[8] which they claim is too common in today's
society. Commercial Alert asks for full disclosure of all product placement
arrangements, arguing that most product placements are deceptive and not
clearly disclosed. They advocate notification before and during television
programs with embedded advertisements. One justification for this is to allow
greater parental control for children, whom they claim are easily influenced
by product placement.

The Writers Guild of America, a trade union representing authors of TV
scripts, had raised objections in 2005 that its members are forced to write ad
copy disguised as storyline on the grounds that "the result is that tens of
millions of viewers are sometimes being sold products without their knowledge,
sold in opaque, subliminal ways and sold in violation of government
regulations."[9]

According to PQMedia, a consulting firm that tracks the product placement
market, 2006 product placement was estimated at $3.07B rising to $5.6B in
2010. However, these figures are somewhat misleading in PQMedia's view in that
today, many product placement and brand integration deals are a combination of
advertising and product placement. In these deals, the product placement is
often contingent upon the purchase of advertising revenues. When the product
placement that is bundled with advertising is allocated to part of the
spending, PQMedia estimates that product placement is closer to $7B in value,
rising to $10B by 2010.

A major driver of growth for the use of product placement is the increasing
use of digital video recorders (DVR) such as TiVO which enable viewers to skip
advertisements.[citation needed] This ad skipping behavior increases in
frequency the longer a household has owned a DVR.

## [edit] Products

Certain products are featured more than others. Commonly seen are automobiles,
consumer electronics and computers, and tobacco products.

### [edit] Automobiles

The most common products to be promoted in this way are automobiles.
Frequently, all the important vehicles in a movie or television serial will be
supplied by one manufacturer. For example, The X-Files used Fords, as do
leading characters on 24. The James Bond films pioneered such placement.[10]
The 1974 film The Man with the Golden Gun featured extensive use of AMC cars,
even in scenes in Thailand, where AMC cars weren't sold, and had the steering
wheel on the wrong side of the vehicle for the country's roads. In XXY (2007)
all vehicles depicted are Toyotas, even though the film takes place in South
America; the film's credits acknowledge the automaker as having funded
portions of the film's production. The last two Bond films had used vehicles
from Ford or its subsidiaries. In Bad Boys 2, Transformers and The Matrix
Reloaded, almost every car was made by General Motors, the only exception
being the Ferrari in Bad Boys 2.

Other times, vehicles or other products take on such key roles in the film
it's as if they are another character. Nissan cars also feature prominently in
the 'Heroes' TV show, the logos often zoomed in/out of or whole cars shown for
a few seconds at the beginning of a new scene. In The Matrix Reloaded, a key
chase scene is conducted between a brand new Cadillac CTS and a Cadillac
Escalade EXT. The chase scene also features a Ducati motorcycle in the
getaway. Three of the James Bond films starring Pierce Brosnan featured a BMW
car before fan outcry pressured the producers to return to using the
traditional Aston Martin, which was owned by Ford Motor Company at the time
and thus brought in more product placement. In addition, a Shelby GT500 is
used extensively at the beginning of I Am Legend. In the 2008 movie Taken,
Liam Neeson drives AUDI cars, first an A3 and a S8 in the final high speed
scene on the streets of Paris. All of the cars in the video game Tom Clancy's
Rainbow Six: Vegas 2 are manufactured by Dodge.

### [edit] Consumer electronics and computers

The 2006 film Casino Royale features many Sony product placements throughout:
A BD-R disc is prominently portrayed at one time, all characters use VAIO
laptops, Sony Ericsson cell phones and GPSs, BRAVIA televisions, and Bond uses
a Cyber-shot to take photos. (It was the first Bond film to be produced since
Sony acquired the Bond franchise.)

Apple's products frequently appear in films and on television, Apple has
stated that they do not pay for this.[11]. (Notably, recognizable Apple
products have appeared in newspaper comic strips, including Opus, Baby Blues,
Non Sequitur, and FoxTrot, even though paid placement in comics is all but
unknown.) In a twist on traditional product placement, Hewlett-Packard
computers now appear exclusively as part of photo layouts in the IKEA catalog
in addition to placing plastic models of its computers in IKEA stores, having
taken over Apple's position in the Swedish furniture retailer's promotional
materials several years ago. Hewlett-Packard also put their computers in the
US production of The Office.

In WarGames (1983), the use of an IMSAI 8080 desktop computer was originally
proposed by Cliff McMullen of Unique Products, the same Los Angeles product
placement company which had placed Reeses Pieces in Steven Spielberg's "E.T.
the Extra-Terrestrial" (1982).[12] Other WarGames product placements include
the main character's mother being portrayed as a real estate broker at the
behest of marketers at Century 21.

In Splash (1984), a television set blares advertisements for (now-defunct)
electronics retailer Crazy Eddie and for Bloomingdale's department store.

In video games, products that most often appear are placements for processors
or graphics cards. For example in EA's Battlefield 2142, ads for Intel Core 2
processors appear on map billboards. EA's The Sims contains in-game
advertising for Intel and for McDonald's.[13]

In the video game "F.E.A.R", all of the laptops have a Dell screensaver on
them and the other computers in the game also feature this screensaver.

### [edit] Food and drink

In Beetlejuice (1988), Minute Maid is displayed as a brand of juice; in the
Back to the Future trilogy, Pizza Hut's future products are depicted to
include a pizza which can be ordered and hydrated for immediate consumption.

In addition to the placement of brand specific elements within the context of
a given program, entire formats of media have been created to feature
individual brands within the context of a genre - an example of this is The
Corkscrew Diary (2006),[14] in which this travelogue about wine and food
features emerging destination estates and the wines they produce which in turn
provides a platform through which these lesser-known brands may find exposure.

### [edit] Travel

The promotion of individual travel destinations and services ranges from
subtle to overt.

While the award of "an all expense-paid trip" to some destination as a game
show prize or an acknowledgement in a show's closing credits that
transportation for participants was provided by a specific airline had long
been commonplace in commercial television, a more refined approach to
promoting a travel destination is to assist and subsidise film production
companies willing to set their story in or shoot footage on-location at the
destination being promoted.

While critics of competitive film subsidies cite runaway production as a
pattern of filming US productions in other countries for purely-economic
reasons, a movie set in an individual travel destination can be a valuable
advertisement. According to State of Florida film commissioner Paul Sirmons,
"the movies create huge, larger-than-life ads for where they are shot. 'CSI
Miami' draws people from overseas to Miami. Seaside was put on the map by 'The
Truman Show.' Movies just keep playing year after year getting the images out
there."[15]

The Love Boat, an American Broadcasting Company series which ran from
1977â1986, was set aboard the Pacific Princess, a ship of the Princess
Cruise Lines. As an advertisement, this product placement is valuable enough
that printed advertisements for the line would employ the trademarked slogan
"It's more than a cruise, it's the Love Boat"[16] until 2002.[17]

### [edit] Tobacco

The James Bond film Licence to Kill featured use of the Lark brand of
cigarette and the producers accepted payment for that product placement. The
studio's executives apparently believed that the placement triggered the
American warning notice requirement for cigarette advertisements and thus the
movie carried the Surgeon General's Warning at the end credits of the film.
This brought forth calls for banning such cigarette advertisements in future
films. Later releases of License to Kill, especially for video and television
releases, had the Lark pack replaced with a similar-looking, generic pack.

Reviewing previously secret tobacco advertising documents, the British Medical
Journal concluded:[citation needed]

> The tobacco industry recruits new smokers by associating its products with
fun, excitement, sex, wealth, and power and as a means of expressing rebellion
and independence. One of the ways it has found to promote these associations
has been to encourage smoking in entertainment productions.1 Exposure to
smoking in entertainment media is associated with increased smoking and
favourable attitudes towards tobacco use among adolescents.2â8

> While the tobacco industry has routinely denied active involvement in
entertainment programming, previously secret tobacco industry documents made
available in the USA show that the industry has had a long and deep
relationship with Hollywood. Placing tobacco products in movies and on
television (fig 1Go), encouraging celebrity use and endorsement, advertising
in entertainment oriented magazines, designing advertising campaigns to
reflect Hollywood glamour, and sponsoring entertainment oriented events have
all been part of the industry's relationship with the entertainment industry.  
>  \-- How the tobacco industry built its relationship with Hollywood, BMJ
2002[18]

## [edit] Radio and television

### [edit] Reality TV

Product placement advertisements can be common in reality tv-shows. For
example the well-known Russian television show Dom-2 (similar to Big Brother)
often features one of the participants stating something along the lines of:
"Oh, did you check out the new product X by company Y yet?" after which the
camera zooms in onto the named product. It has been claimed that the
participants get paid for it.

### [edit] Public and educational television

In the United States, most educational television operates under a funding
model in which local stations receive donations from Viewers Like You but do
not interrupt programming directly with spot advertising. While the use of
underwriting as a form of indirect advertisement ("Production [or local
acquisition] of this programme is made possible by X, makers of Y") is
permissible and common on non-commercial educational stations, price
comparisons or calls to action ("Buy X now, ten cents off, this week only!")
of the form used by commercial television are expressly prohibited as a
condition of the station's license.[19]

It may therefore make good business sense for an underwriter of an educational
programme to obtain greater visibility through a form of promotional
consideration in which (for instance) a manufacturer of woodworking tools
could, instead of merely donating money to fund production of a popular home-
improvement show, go one step further by also providing the tools which are
used on-air to build the individual projects.

This approach is suitable both for commercial and non-commercial television,
but requires very careful targeting to match a product to a show which
naturally would already use that product. A program like commercial The
Learning Channel's Trading Spaces is an ideal fit for a vendor such as Home
Depot. Non-commercial broadcasts such as PBS's The New Yankee Workshop would
represent an ideal fit for power tool makers Porter-Cable, Delta Machinery and
Vermont-American while a home-improvement programme like The Red Green Show
could represent an once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for a manufacturer of duct
tape.

One unusual placement is American Public Television's Classical Stretch, a
long-running series of physical fitness lessons hosted by MontrÃ©al's Miranda
Esmonde-White with the first three seasons distributed by New York PBS
flagship station WPBS-TV.[20] As the market for physical fitness advice is
largely saturated, Classical Stretch endeavours to differentiate itself from
the many existing programmes in its genre by having everything take place
outdoors, on a tropical beach, with unobtrusive classical music in the
background.[21] In theory, this could prohibitively increase a non-commercial
program's production costs; in reality, the costs of relocating production and
constructing necessary facilities are readily borne by the show's
underwriters, a travel company and a luxury resort in sunny Riviera Maya,
Mexico.[22]

### [edit] TV programmes

List of TV shows with the most instances of product placement (11/07-11/08;
Nielsen Media Research)

  * "The Biggest Loser" 6,248
  * "American Idol," 4,636
  * "Extreme Makeover: Home Edition," 3,371
  * "America's Toughest Jobs," 2,807
  * "One Tree Hill," 2,575
  * "Deal or No Deal," 2,292
  * "America's Next Top Model," 2,241
  * "Last Comic Standing," 1,993
  * "Kitchen Nightmares" 1,853
  * "Hell's Kitchen," 1,807

### [edit] Payola and legal considerations

Much of the current body of broadcast law pertaining to the obligation of
licensed broadcasters to disclose to audiences when they (or their staff)
receive money or valuables in return for on-air promotion of a product dates
to the payola scandals of 1950's broadcast radio.

An investigation launched in November 1959 into allegations that some radio
disc jockeys had accepted bribes in return for radio airplay[23] led to the
indictment of disc jockey Alan Freed (of WABC and WINS) on May 9, 1960; he
would be fined for accepting $2,500 to play certain songs, a violation of
commercial bribery laws, and would ultimately lose his employment in
commercial radio. On September 13, 1960 the US government acted to ban payola
in broadcasting. Under current United States law, Section 317 of the
Communications Act states that "All matter broadcast by any radio station for
which money, service, or other valuable consideration is directly or
indirectly paid, or promised to or charged or accepted by, the station so
broadcasting, from any person, shall, at the time the same is so broadcast, be
announced as paid for or furnished, as the case may be, by such person. . ."
with similar and related provisions reflected in Federal Communications
Commission regulations as CFR 47, Section 73.1212.[24]

While these provisions have been taken into legal consideration in subsequent
payola investigations, including one 2005 investigation by then-New York State
attorney general Eliot Spitzer into Sony BMG and other major record
companies,[25] it is probable that a regulation requiring advertisements and
advertisers to be clearly identified has far broader implications in many
areas, including that of the use of product placement by advertisers in
broadcast programming.

Often, a broadcaster will claim to have complied with the regulation by
placing some form of acknowledgement of promotional consideration in an
inconspicuous place in a broadcast - such as embedded within a portion of a
programme's closing credits. The question of whether adequate disclosure is
being provided, however, remains open;[26] the issue was raised in 2005 by FCC
commissioner Jonathan Adelstein, on the grounds that "some will tell you that
if broadcasters and cable companies insist on further commercializing new and
other shows alike, that is their business. But if they do so without
disclosing it to the viewing public, that is payola, and that is the FCCâs
business."[27] In 2008, the Federal Communications Commission gave notice of
proposed rulemaking, in which it proposed to require more disclosure of
product placement.[28] According to Adelstein, "You shouldn't need a
magnifying glass to know who's pitching you... A crawl at the end of the show
shrunk down so small the human eye can't read it isn't really in the spirit of
the law."[29]

Within the United Kingdom, product placement is banned.[citation needed] A
recent EU directive would have allowed it, however culture secretary Andy
Burnham refused to accept it, and it appears likely the UK will introduce laws
to fully outlaw it, whereas in the past it was only regulated by OFCOM.

### [edit] Music and recording industries

While radio and television stations are at least in theory strictly regulated
by national governments, producers of printed or recorded works are not,
leading marketers in some cases to attempt to get advertisers' brands
mentioned in lyrics of popular songs.

A recent popularity of product placement in music videos and actual song
lyrics can be accredited to The Kluger Agency. Due to the repetitive nature of
a popular song and its effects on pop culture as a whole, Product Placement or
what the music industry calls "Brand Partnerships" are becoming a more
effective way to create a trend practically overnight.

In January 2009, an album "Migracorridos" with five songs including accordion
ballad "El Mas Grande Enemigo" had received airplay on twenty-five Mexican
radio stations. The tune purports to be the lament of a would-be immigrant
left to die in the Arizona desert by coyotes (people smugglers).[30] No
disclosure was made to the radio stations that the US Border Patrol had
commissioned the compact disc with content devised by ElevaciÃ³n, a Hispanic
advertising agency based in Washington and New York.[31]

## [edit] Extreme and unusual examples

### [edit] Overkill

The film I, Robot, though set in the future, makes heavy use of product
placements for Converse trainers, Ovaltine, Audi, FedEx, Dos Equis, and JVC
among others, all of them introduced within the first ten minutes of the film.
One particularly infamous scene borders into an actual advertisement in which
a character compliments Will Smith's character's shoes to which he replies
"Converse. Vintage 2004" (the year of the film's release). Audi invested the
most on the film, going so far as to create a special car for the film, the
Audi RSQ. It was expected that the placement would increase brand awareness
and raise the emotional appeal of the Audi brand, objectives that were
considered achieved when surveys conducted in the United States showed that
the Audi RSQ gave a substantial boost to the image ratings of the brand.[32]
The Audi RSQ is seen during nine minutes of the film, although other Audis
like the Audi A6, the Audi TT and the Audi A2 can be seen sprinkled throughout
the film.[33] I, Robot was ranked "the worst film for product placement" on a
British site.[34]

The film The Island, directed by Michael Bay, features at least 35 individual
products or brands, including cars, bottled water, shoes, credit cards, beer,
ice cream, and even a search engine.[35] The film was highly criticized for
this.[36] In movie's DVD Commentary track, Michael Bay claims he added the
advertisements for realism purposes. [37]

The comedy film Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby also contained a
high amount of product placement. Characters repeatedly mention brands under
the disguise of NASCAR sponsorship. The movie contains possibly the first
instance of an actual television commercial in a movie. It was intended to
mock the controversy with NASCAR fans under the Unified Television Contract
2001-06 where they criticised the excessive number of commercial breaks during
races.[38]

Bill Cosby's film Leonard Part 6 was widely criticized for its Coca Cola
product placements, as was The Wizard for Nintendo products.

The 2001 film Josie and the Pussycats featured a large amount of blatant
product placement for brands such as Puma, Target, McDonalds and TJ Maxx. This
appears to be done ironically, as the plot of the film revolves around
subliminal messages in advertising. The film's general message can also be
construed as an anti-consumerist one.

The Japanese animated series Code Geass is sponsored by the Japanese branch of
Pizza Hut. Despite the fact that the series is set in an alternate reality, at
least one main character is depicted ordering and receiving a Pizza Hut pizza
on several occasions. The company's logo also appears throughout the series.

### [edit] Self-criticism

The pilot episode of the NBC sitcom 30 Rock prominently featured General
Electric's Trivection oven, which many people believed was an example of
product placement.[39] However, Tina Fey, the show's creator, stated in an
interview that the oven was included purely as a joke,[40] although this
didn't stop GE from running ads for the oven during the commercial break. GE
owns an 80% controlling interest in NBC. Allison Eckelkamp, a spokesperson for
GE, said that GE chose to do this to make sure viewers knew it was a real
product.[41] In the sixth episode of season two, Tina Fey's character endorses
a cellular phone service, then turns to the camera and asks "Can we have our
money now?", breaking the fourth wall and still managing to underhandedly
endorse the product.

The 1988 film Return of the Killer Tomatoes utilized the concept in a parodic
manner -- at one point, the film stops, as money to produce it ran out. The
film's producer (portrayed by George Clooney) steps in, suggesting product
placement as a way to recoup the losses. This was followed by several scenes
with blatant product placement, including a Pepsi billboard installed in front
of the villain's mansion.

The film Minority Report, makes heavy use of product placement, including
Coca-Cola, Gap, and Lexus. Director Steven Spielberg also uses one scene to
criticize advertising: the main character (Tom Cruise) is harassed by
personalized advertisements calling out his own name.

The film Wayne's World included a parody in which both Wayne and Garth decry
product placement while at the same time clearly endorsing products.

The film Fight Club, directed by David Fincher, bit the hand that fed it by
depicting acts of violence against most of the products that paid to be placed
in the film[citation needed]. Examples include the scene where the Apple Store
is broken into, the scene in which Brad Pitt and Edward Norton smash the
headlights of a new Volkswagen Beetle, and trying to blow up a 'popular coffee
franchise', a thinly veiled dig at Starbucks.

The film Superstar, starring Will Ferrell and Molly Shannon, shows every
resident in town driving VW New Beetles. However, it is possible that this was
done for comic effect.

The comedy film Kung Pow! Enter the Fist also attempted to spoof its product
placements, clearly pointing out the anachronistic inclusion of a Taco Bell in
the film. In a similar vein, in Looney Tunes: Back In Action the main
characters stumble across a Wal-Mart while stranded in the middle of Death
Valley and get all necessary supplies for their endorsement of the company.
The television show Kannagi: Crazy Shrine Maidens poked fun at its sponsor
Sony in one episode, by having one character give another a Blu-Ray disk with
the tagline "It's a Sony", only for them to complain that they don't have a
Blu-ray player, to which the character responds by producing a copy in
Betamax, again with the line "It's a Sony".

### [edit] Faux product placement and parodies

    For further information, see Fictional brands.
The 1998 film The Truman Show utilized the concept, although in a manner
different than other films. The film's focus, a 24-hour television broadcast
called "The Truman Show" that focuses on the life of Truman Burbank, uses faux
product placement. His wife places products in front of the hidden cameras,
even naming certain products in dialogue with her husband, all of which
increases Truman's suspicion as he comes to realize his surroundings are
intentionally fabricated.

Some filmmakers have responded to product placement by creating fictional
products that frequently appear in the movies they make. Some examples:

  * Kevin Smith \- Nails Cigarettes, Mooby Corporation, Chewlees Gum, Discreeto Burritos
  * Quentin Tarantino \- Red Apple Cigarettes, Jack Rabbit Slim's Restaurants, Big Kahuna Burger
  * Robert Rodriguez \- Chango Beer
  * Pixar Animation Studios \- Pizza Planet, Dinoco
  * Warner Brothers \- Acme Corporation
  * Coen Brothers \- Dapper Dan Hair Wax

This practice is also fairly common in certain comics, such as Svetlana
Chmakova's Dramacon, which makes several product-placement-esque usages of
"Pawky", (a modification of the name of the Japanese snack "Pocky", popular
among the anime and manga fan community in which the story is set) or Naoko
Takeuchi's Sailor Moon, which includes numerous references to the series
Codename: Sailor V which Sailor Moon was spun off of; the anime makes further
use of this meta-referential gag, going so far as having an animator on a
Codename: Sailor V feature film be a victim in one episode.

This practice is also common in certain "reality-based" video games such as
the Grand Theft Auto series which feature fictitious stores such as Ammu-
Nation, Vinyl Countdown, Gash (spoofing Gap. Another spoof was made in GTA:
San Andreas with Zip), Pizza Boy, etc.

### [edit] Reverse placement

So-called "reverse product placement" takes "faux product placement" a step
further, by creating products in real life to match those seen in a fictional
setting.[42] For example, in 2007, 7-Eleven rebranded 11 of its American
stores and one Canadian store as "Kwik-E-Marts", selling some real-life
versions of products seen in episodes of the Simpsons such as Buzz Cola and
Krusty-O's cereal.[43] In 1997, Acme Communications was created as a chain of
real television stations; the firm is named for the fictional Acme Corporation
of Warner Brothers fame.

In 1949, Crazy Eddie was created as a fictional car dealer in the film A
Letter to Three Wives.[44] That name, bestowed in 1971 upon a real-life
electronics chain in New York City, appeared in 1984 as advertising placement
in Splash; a 1989 parody, UHF, completed the circle by depicting a Crazy Ernie
using a hard sell of "buy this car or I'll club a seal" as a TV ad campaign.

In the 1984 cult film Repo Man, a reverse form of product placement is used,
with an exaggerated form of 1980's era generic packaging used on products
prominently shown on-screen (these include "Beer", "Drink", "Dry Gin" and
"Food - Meat Flavored").

### [edit] Virtual placement

Virtual product placement uses computer graphics to insert the product into
the program after the program is complete.[45][46]

As of 2007, a new trend is emerging in product placement, the development of
capabilities that permit dynamic or switchable product placement. Previously
post production tools have permitted one time insertion of new product
placement images and billboard advertising, notable in televised at baseball
and hockey games. As of 2007, startups are offering or developing the ability
to switch product placement.[citation needed] First generation virtual product
placement has tended to be based upon sports arenas where the geometrical
relationships of camera and the surface of the flat area onto which the
billboard is projected, can be easily calculated. Second generation product
placement or dynamic product placement is more focused upon commercial
products. Third generation virtual or dynamic product placement allows
targeting of customers with different products that can be dynamically
switched based upon such factors as demographics, psychographics or behavioral
information about the consumer.

Where game software has access to a user's Internet connection, marketers gain
the ability change displayed in-game advertisements on the fly. More
controversially, in-game advertising vendors such as Microsoft-owned Massive
Incorporated may use software to transmit user information to their servers,
such as individual player ID's and data about what was on the screen and for
how long.[47]

Also of interest are hypervideo techniques that can insert interactive
elements into online video.

## [edit] Product displacement

According to Danny Boyle, director of 2008 film Slumdog Millionaire, the
makers had to resort to something he calls "Product displacement" when
companies such as Mercedes refused to allow their products to be used in non-
flattering settings. While they didn't mind having a gangster driving their
cars, they objected to their products been shown in a slum setting. This
forced the makers in post-production to remove logos digitally, costing "tens
of thousands of pounds".[48]

Similarly, in the 1979 film The Blues Brothers, portions of the defunct Dixie
Square Mall in Harvey, Illinois were reconstructed in faÃ§ade and used as the
scene of an indoor car chase. Signage belonging to tenants of the mall when it
was operational (1966 - 1978) was in some cases removed and replaced with that
of other vendors; for instance, a Walgreens would become a Toys "Ð¯" Us.[49]

## [edit] Further reading

  1. Balasubramanian, Siva K. (1994) "Beyond Advertising and Publicity: Hybrid Messages and Public Policy Issues," Journal of Advertising, 23 (4), 29-46.
  2. Balasubramanian, Siva K., James Karrh and Hemant Patwardhan (2006), "Audience Response to Product Placements: An Integrative Framework and Future Research Agenda," Journal of Advertising, 35 (3), 115-141.
  3. Crispin Miller, Mark (April 1990). "Hollywood: The Ad". The Atlantic. http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/199004/hollywood. Retrieved on 8 February 2009.
  4. Pascal Schumacher: EffektivitÃ¤t von Ausgestaltungsformen des Product Placement, Fribourg 2007
  5. Russell, Cristel A. and Barbara Stern (2006) âConsumers, Characters, and Products: A Balance Model of Sitcom Product Placement Effects,â Journal of Advertising, 35 (1), 7-18.
  6. Russell, Cristel A. and Michael Belch (2005) âA Managerial Investigation into the Product Placement Industry,â Journal of Advertising Research, 45 (1), 73-92.
  7. Russell, Cristel A. (2002) âInvestigating the Effectiveness of Product Placements in Television Shows: The Role of Modality and Plot Connection Congruence on Brand Memory and Attitude,â Journal of Consumer Research, 29 (3), 306-318.

Brandcameo Annual Product PLacement Awards
www.brandchannel.com/features_effect.asp?pf_id=435

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Schiller, Gail (2005-06-01). "Win, draw for Burnett branding". The Hollywood Reporter. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/search/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1000939337. Retrieved on 2008-05-28. ""But marketers warned that "Apprentice" had used nearly every episode this past season as a call to action for its advertising partners and viewers could become wary of the embedded marketing messages that are becoming a bit too blatant. .""
  2. ^ Swift, Deanna (2005-07-07). "Leaked Memo Reveals WTO Plan to "Sell" Itself to American Youth". Alternet.com. http://www.alternet.org/story/11172/?page=entire. Retrieved on 2008-05-28. ""Adopt embedded marketing strategy. Teen marketing research shows that teens may respond positively to marketing symbols used in association with formerly unpopular brands.""
  3. ^ "When ads get Personal". CFO, The Magazine for Senior Financial Executives. 2001-09-01. http://www.accessmylibrary.com/coms2/summary_0286-5809504_ITM. Retrieved on 2008-05-28. ""The executive creative director at marketing firm RTCdirect, in Washington, D.C., Shapiro sees embedded marketing as the logical next stage in the development of loyal brands.""
  4. ^ Lomax, Alyce (2006-03-23). "Advertising, Disrupted". Motley Fool. http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2006/03/23/advertising-disrupted.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-05-28. ""Product placements and programming with embedded marketing messages are also becoming more prevalent.""
  5. ^ http://www.erma.org/web/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=276&Itemid=80
  6. ^ http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php?title=Product_placement
  7. ^ ERMA.org, a Hollywood product placement association
  8. ^ http://www.commercialalert.org/issues/culture/product-placement
  9. ^ Scribes chase blurb bonanza: Product placement perturbs WGA, DAVE MCNARY, Variety, November 13, 2005
  10. ^ Nadja Tata: "Product Placement in James-Bond-Filmen". SaarbrÃ¼cken 2006 - ISBN 3-86550-440-X
  11. ^ "Apple Gets a Big Slice Of Product-Placement Pie", "Washington Post" April 15, 2006
  12. ^ http://www.imsai.net/Movies/WarGames.htm
  13. ^ Videogames and Politics, Å isler, VÃ­t. In EnterMultimediale 2, International Festival of Art and New Technologies, Praha: CIANT, 2005, p. 38 â 40. ISBN 80-239-4927-6.
  14. ^ The Corkscrew Diary
  15. ^ Film Subsidy Game: Pensacola Filmmaker Trying To Capitalize, Tom Rousch, Pensacola Independent News, May 10, 2007
  16. ^ Princess Cruises and "The Love Boat" Connection
  17. ^ Princess Cruises Bids Farewell to the Original "Love Boat", Business Wire, October 27 2002
  18. ^ How the tobacco industry built its relationship with Hollywood - Mekemson and Glantz 11 (Supplement 1): i81 - Tobacco Control
  19. ^ In the Matter of Commission Policy Concerning the Noncommercial Nature of Educational Broadcasting from FCC 86-161 public notice of April 11, 1986
  20. ^ WPBS-TV: Classical Stretch
  21. ^ Classical Stretch: PBS Airs a Great Workout for Anyone, Associated Content, March 14, 2007
  22. ^ Classical Stretch/(La mÃ©thode Classical Stretch), Giancarlo La Giorgia, Canadian Health magazine/Canadian Medical Association
  23. ^ Payola Scandal Again Rocking, Roiling Radio: FCC Scrutiny Recalls '59 Charges, RedOrbit, 19 September 2005
  24. ^ CFR TITLE 47 PART 73.1212 - Sponsorship identification
  25. ^ Will the latest payola scandal shake up the radio and music industries?, Fiona Morgan, Indyweek, 10 August 2005
  26. ^ FCC Panelist Wants Probe Of Product 'Payola', Howard Kurtz, Washington Post, May 25, 2005
  27. ^ FCCâs Adelstein: Probe âPayolaâ, Ted Hearn, Multichannel News, May 30 2005
  28. ^ Reform groups want FCC to take on product placement epidemic, Matthew Lasar, ARStechnica, June 22, 2008
  29. ^ Product Placements To Get A Closer Look by the FCC, Huffington Post, June 24, 2008
  30. ^ 'Migra corridos' aim to keep immigrants home, Associated Press, January 23rd 2009
  31. ^ US uses songs to deter immigrants, Carlos Ceresole, BBC Mundo, Los Angeles, 15 February 2009
  32. ^ Product Placement in the Film "I, Robot" a Huge Success: The Audi RSQ Spurs on the Brand's Image Ratings
  33. ^ I, robot - Movie Review - Motor Trend
  34. ^ TOP 10 WORST MOVIES FOR PRODUCT PLACEMENT Movie Feature at TheShiznit.co.uk
  35. ^ Numsum.com Partial list of product placements in The Island. Retrieved March 8, 2007.
  36. ^ Advertisingindustrynewswire.com Criticism of product placements in The Island. Retrieved March 8, 2007.
  37. ^ Agony Booth Discussion of The Island DVD Commentary Track. Retrieved April 26, 2007.
  38. ^ Themoviespoiler.com Plot, product placements. Retrieved March 23, 2007.
  39. ^ Trivection Oven on kitchencontraptions.com
  40. ^ On '30 Rock,' Tina Fey Draws From Her Past At 'SNL', Access Hollywood, October 10, 2006
  41. ^ GE's Trivection Oven Gets Ready For Its Close-Up, Colleen Bohen, TWICE, December 4, 2006
  42. ^ http://news.yahoo.com/s/ap/20070701/ap_on_bi_ge/7_eleven_kwik_e_mart_1 [broken link]
  43. ^ Locate A Kwik-E-Mart Near You, 7-eleven.com (archived, 2007)
  44. ^ ADVERTISING; Fake Products and the Movies That Loved Them, Stuart Elliott, New York Times, January 9, 2006
  45. ^ Advertising's Twilight Zone: That Signpost Up Ahead May Be a Virtual Product, SAM LUBELL, New York Times, January 2, 2006]
  46. ^ Virtual Product Placement Infiltrates TV, Film, Games, Nancy Cohen, E-Commerce Times, Feb 23, 2006
  47. ^ Ads get piece of the action, Blaine Kyllo, Georgia Straight (Vancouver), September 1, 2005
  48. ^ Timesonline
  49. ^ http://www.pawfilmworks.com/DSMHistory.html

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Product_placement"

Categories: Film and video terminology | Marketing techniques | Television
terminology

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since September 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 07:15.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



