
# Citizen Kane

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Citizen Kane  
<IMG>  
theatrical poster  
Directed by Orson Welles  
Produced by Orson Welles  
Written by Herman J. Mankiewicz  
Orson Welles  
Starring Orson Welles  
Joseph Cotten  
Agnes Moorehead  
Dorothy Comingore  
Ruth Warrick  
Everett Sloane  
George Coulouris  
Ray Collins  
Music by Bernard Herrmann  
Cinematography Gregg Toland  
Editing by Robert Wise  
Distributed by RKO Pictures  
Release date(s) United States: 1 May 1941  
Running time 119 minutes  
Country United States  
Language English  
Budget $686,034 (estimated)  
Citizen Kane is a 1941 American drama film, and the first feature film
directed by Orson Welles. It was nominated for an Academy Award in nine
categories, but won only for Best Original Screenplay by Herman Mankiewicz and
Welles. It was released by RKO Pictures.

The story is a fictionalized pastiche of the life of William Randolph Hearst
and Welles' own life.[1] Upon its release, Hearst prohibited mention of the
film in any of his newspapers. The film traces the life and career of Charles
Foster Kane, a man whose career in the publishing world is born of idealistic
social service, but gradually evolves into a ruthless pursuit of power.
Narrated principally through flashbacks, the story is revealed through the
research of a newspaper reporter seeking to solve the mystery of the newspaper
magnate's dying word: "Rosebud."

Citizen Kane is often cited as being one of the most innovative works in the
history of film. The American Film Institute placed it at number one in its
list of the 100 greatest U.S. movies of all time in 1997 and again in the
revised list of 2007. In a recent poll of film critics and directors conducted
by the British Film Institute, Citizen Kane was ranked the number one best
film of all time by both groups.[2][3]

## Contents

  * 1 Plot
  * 2 Cast
  * 3 Screenplay
    * 3.1 Development
    * 3.2 Debate over authorship
    * 3.3 Sources
      * 3.3.1 William Randolph Hearst
      * 3.3.2 Susan Alexander
      * 3.3.3 Samuel Insull
      * 3.3.4 Welles as Kane
      * 3.3.5 Charles F. Murphy
      * 3.3.6 Rosebud
  * 4 Production
    * 4.1 Filmmaking innovations
      * 4.1.1 Cinematography
      * 4.1.2 Time compression
      * 4.1.3 Special effects
      * 4.1.4 Makeup
      * 4.1.5 Soundtrack
    * 4.2 Music
  * 5 Reception
    * 5.1 Hearst's response
  * 6 Awards and honors
    * 6.1 Academy Awards - 1941
    * 6.2 Others
  * 7 Recognition
    * 7.1 Criticism
  * 8 Prints
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
    * 10.1 Notes
    * 10.2 Bibliography
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Plot

The film opens in a night setting on a vast palatial estate on which the sign
"No Trespassing" is posted. Gradually the camera comes to rest in a bedroom on
which an elderly man is lying, holding a snow globe. He utters the word
"Rosebud" and lets go of the snow globe which drops and smashes on the floor.
A nurse enters and covers the man in a way that indicates he has died. The
scene fades out.

An abrupt cut leads to a newsreel obituary in which we find out that the
estate was Xanadu and the man who owned it and died there was the enormously
wealthy media magnate Charles Foster Kane (Orson Welles). The newsreel reveals
details of his life - how his childhood was spent in poverty, then changed
when gold was discovered in his family's mine, how he built up his empire of
newspapers, how both his marriages were unsuccessful, his conflicting
pronouncements, and how the power he once obtained disappeared.

After its preview, the producer of the newsreel feels that it lacks something
and asks a reporter, Jerry Thompson (William Alland), to find out about Kane's
private life and personality, in particular to discover the meaning behind his
last word. The reporter interviews the great man's friends and associates, and
Kane's story unfolds as a series of flashbacks, some of which present the same
incidents portrayed in the newsreel, but from different recollections.

First, Thompson approaches Kane's second wife, Susan Alexander (Dorothy
Comingore), now an alcoholic who runs her own club, but she refuses to tell
him anything. Thompson then goes to the private archive of Walter Parks
Thatcher (George Coulouris), a deceased banker who served as Kane's guardian
during his childhood. It is through Thatcher's written memoirs that Thompson
learns about Kane's childhood. In the first flashback, Kane as a young child
is forced to leave his beloved mother (Agnes Moorehead) when he becomes
suddenly wealthy after becoming an heir to the world's third largest gold
mine, and is sent to live with Mr. Thatcher.

Thompson then interviews Kane's personal business manager Mr. Bernstein
(Everett Sloane), best friend Jedediah Leland (Joseph Cotten), Susan for a
second time, and Kane's butler Raymond (Paul Stewart) who recalls him saying
"Rosebud" while holding a small glass globe â the same globe Kane dropped as
he died. However, Thompson thinks this is worth very little. Other flashbacks
show Kane's entry into the newspaper business and his profit-seeking with low-
quality "yellow journalism". He takes control of the newspaper, the New York
Inquirer, and hires all the best journalists (which he hires away from the
Chronicle, the main rival of the Inquirer). His attempted rise to power is
documented, including his first marriage to Emily Monroe Norton (Ruth
Warrick), a President's niece, shown disintegrating through fragments of
conversations at breakfast over many years, and his campaign for the office of
governor of New York State. A "love nest" scandal with Susan Alexander ends
both his first marriage and his political aspirations. Kane marries his
mistress, but as a result of his domineering personality, he forces Susan into
an operatic career for which she has no talent or ambition, destroys his
relationships and pushes away his loved ones. Kane spends his last years
building his vast estate and lives alone after Susan leaves him, interacting
only with his staff.

Despite Thompson's interviews, he is unable to solve the mystery and concludes
that "Rosebud" will forever remain an enigma. At that point, the camera pans
over workers burning some of Kane's many possessions. One throws an old sled
into the furnace â the same sled that Kane was riding as a child the day his
mother sent him away. The word "Rosebud" painted on the sled burns as the
camera closes in on it in the furnace. There is a shot of a chimney with black
smoke coming out. For the viewer this solves the "Rosebud" mystery, the sled
is a token of the only time in his life when he was poor; more than this,
however, it represents the only time in his life when he was truly happy and
wanted for nothing. After this twist ending, the film ends as it began, with
the "No Trespassing" sign at the gates of Kane's estate, Xanadu, an indication
that sometimes we can never know the truth behind people.

## [edit] Cast

Actor Role  
Orson Welles Charles Foster Kane  
William Alland Jerry Thompson  
Georgia Backus Bertha Anderson  
Fortunio Bonanova Signor Matiste  
Sonny Bupp Charles Foster Kane III  
Ray Collins Jim W. Gettys  
Dorothy Comingore Susan Alexander Kane  
Joseph Cotten Jedediah Leland  
George Coulouris Walter Parks Thatcher  
Agnes Moorehead Mary Kane  
Erskine Sanford Herbert Carter  
Gus Schilling The Headwaiter  
Harry Shannon Kane's Father  
Everett Sloane Mr. Bernstein  
Paul Stewart Raymond  
Buddy Swan Young Charles Foster Kane  
Ruth Warrick Emily Monroe Norton Kane  
Philip Van Zandt Mr. Rawlston  
Alan Ladd (bit part)  
## [edit] Screenplay

### [edit] Development

Mankiewicz as co-writer

Richard Carringer, author of The Making of Citizen Kane (1996), described the
early stages of the screenplay:

    "Welles's first step toward the realization of Citizen Kane was to seek the assistance of a screenwriting professional. Fortunately, help was near at hand. . . . When Welles moved to Hollywood, it happened that a veteran screenwriter, Herman Mankiewicz, was recuperating from an automobile accident and between jobs. . . Mankiewicz was an expatriate from Broadway who had been writing for films for almost fifteen years."[4]:16
However, according to film author Harlan Lebo, he was also "one of Hollywood's
most notorious personalities." [5]:12 Mankiewicz was the older brother of
producer-director Joseph Mankiewicz and was a former writer for The New Yorker
and the New York Times and had moved to Hollywood in 1926. By the time Welles
contacted him he had "established himself as a brilliant wit, a writer of
extraordinary talent, [and] a warm friend to many of the screen world's
brightest artists ... [he] produced dialogue of the highest caliber."[5]:12
Yet Mankiewicz's behavior, according to Welles's close friend and associate
John Houseman, was also a "public and private scandal. A neurotic drinker and
compulsive gambler..." Houseman adds, however, that he was also one of the
most intelligent, informed, witty, humane and charming men I have ever known."
[5]:12 Despite those apparent contradictions in his personality, Welles
"recognized the writer's abilities and trusted him to produce," wrote Lebo.
Orson Welles himself later commented, "Nobody was more miserable, more bitter,
and funnier than Mank - a perfect monument to self-destruction. But when the
bitterness wasn't focused straight at you -- he was the best company in the
world." [5]

Ideas and collaboration

According to film historian Clinton Heylin, "the idea of Citizen Kane was the
original conception of Orson Welles, who in early 1940 first discussed the
idea with John Houseman. . .who then suggested that both he and Welles leave
for Los Angeles and discuss the idea with scriptwriter Herman Mankiewicz. He
adds that Mankiewicz "probably believed that Welles had little experience as
an original scriptwriter. . .[and] may even have felt that John Citizen USA,
Welles's working title, was a project he could make his own." [6]:43

Still incapacitated with a broken leg, Mankiewicz was happy to work with
Welles, and an "alliance" for formed, noted Houseman. This combination of a
"brash new director, a nervous studio, and an erratic genius" gave birth to
Citizen Kane, in what Houseman called, "an absurd venture."[5]:14

Houseman recalled that Mankiewicz, during his convalescence, had "revived a
long-simmering idea of creating a film biography in which a man's life would
be brought to the screen after his death through the memories and opinions of
the people who knew him best." And Welles himself, writes Lebo, also had ideas
"that meshed well with this concept and had considered a newspaper publisher
the best subject for the story:

    "I'd been nursing an old notion - the idea of telling the same thing several times - and showing exactly the same thing from wholly different views," Welles said. "Mank liked it, so we started searching for the man it was going to be about ... some big American figure ...Howard Hughes was the first idea. But we got pretty quickly to the press lords."[5]:14
Welles then assigned Mankiewicz, writes Lebo, "to work on an original
screenplay - not an adaptation as his first two projects would have been."
Welles next traveled to New York and desperately "pleaded and persuaded
Houseman to return to Los Angeles to manage Mankiewicz and his writing
schedule." [5]

Hearst as story model

For some time, Mankiewicz wanted to write a screenplay about a public figure
â perhaps a gangster â whose story would be told by the people that knew
him.[7] He had already written an unperformed play The Tree Will Grow about
John Dillinger. Orson Welles liked the idea of multiple viewpoints but was not
interested in playing Dillinger. Mankiewicz and Welles talked about picking
someone else to use a model. They eventually hit on the idea of using William
Randolph Hearst as their central character.

But film critic and author Pauline Kael discovered that Mankiewicz "was
already caught up in the idea of a movie about Hearst" when he was still
working at the New York Times, in 1925. She learned from his babysitter,
Marion Fisher, that she once typed as "he dictated a screenplay, organized in
flashbacks. She recalls that he had barely started on the dictation, which
went on for several weeks, when she remarked that it seemed to be about
William Randolph Hearst, and he said, 'You're a smart girl.' "[8]:269

In Hollywood, Mankiewicz had frequented Hearst's parties until his alcoholism
got him barred. [7] And Hearst was also a person known to Welles. "Once that
was decided," wrote author Don Kilbourne, "Mankiewicz, Welles, and John
Houseman, a cofounder of the Mercury Theatre, rented a place in the desert,
and the task of creating Citizen Kane began." [9]:221 In later years, Houseman
gave Mankiewicz "total" credit for "the creation of Citizen Kane's script" and
credited Welles with "the visual presentation of the picture."[5]:32

Mankiewicz was put under contract by Mercury Productions and was to receive no
credit for his work as he was hired as a script doctor. According to his
contract with RKO, Welles would be given sole screenplay credit, and had
already written a rough script consisting of 300 pages of dialogue with
occasional stage directions under the title of John Citizen, USA.[7]

### [edit] Debate over authorship

<IMG>

<IMG>

Welles visiting Mankiewicz (center, as nurse wipes his brow) in the California
desert during his writing of Citizen Kane. John Houseman (right) is holding
pages of screenplay.

One of the long standing debates of Citizen Kane has been the proper
accreditation of the authorship of the screenplay, which the opening credits
attribute to both Herman J. Mankiewicz and Orson Welles. Mankiewicz biographer
Richard Meryman notes that the dispute had various causes, including the way
the movie was promoted. For instance, When RKO opened the movie on Broadway on
May 1, 1941, followed by showings at theaters in other large cities, the
publicity programs that were printed included photographs of Welles as "the
one-man band, directing, acting, and writing." In a letter to his father
afterwards, Mankiewicz wrote, "I'm particulary furious at the incredibly
insolent description of how Orson wrote his masterpiece. The fact is that
there isn't one single line in the picture that wasn't in writing-writing from
and by me-before ever a camera turned."[10]:270 And film historian Otto
Friedrich said it made Mankiewicz "unhappy to hear Welles quoted in Louella
Parsons's column, before the question of screen credits was officially
settled, as saying, 'So I wrote Citizen Kane.' [11]

According to film critic Pauline Kael, Rita Alexander, who was hired to be
Mankiewic's personal secretary, stated that she "took the dictation from
Mankiewicz from the first paragraph to the last ... and later did the final
rewriting and the cuts, and handled the script at the studio until after the
film was shot. ...[and said] Welles didn't write (or dictate) one line of the
shooting script of Citizen Kane. She added that "Welles himself came to dinner
once or twice...[and] she didn't meet him until after Mankiewicz had finished
dictating the long first draft." [8]:273

As a result, Mankiewicz went to the Screen Writers Guild and declared that he
was the original author. Welles later claimed that he planned on a joint
credit all along, but Mankiewicz claimed that Welles offered him a bonus of
ten thousand dollars if he would let Welles take full credit."[11] According
to Pauline Kael, "he had ample proof of his authorship, and when he took his
evidence to the Screen Writers Guild ... Welles was forced to split the credit
and take second place in the listing."[8]:274

Kael herself felt that Welles downplayed veteran screenwriter Herman J.
Mankiewicz's contribution.[8] She argues that Mankiewicz was the true author
of the screenplay and therefore responsible for much of what made the movie
great. This angered many critics of the day, most notably critic-turned-
filmmaker (and close friend of Welles) Peter Bogdanovich, who rebutted many of
Kael's claims in an article for Esquire titled The Kane Mutiny.

By the time the movie was released, however, Mankiewicz's contribution to the
film was generally known, according to Kael. The Hollywood Reporter wrote the
credit as "Written by Herman Mankiewicz;" Burns Mantle, in his newspaper
column, referrerd to Mankiewicz having written it; and Ben Hecht wrote, "This
movie was not written by Orson Welles. It is the work of Herman J.
Mankiewicz." Kael notes that "Under the present rules of the Guild, Welles's
name would probably not have appeared."[8] She also came to an ironic
conclusion:

    "And so it was by an awful fluke of justice that when Academy Awards night came, and Welles should have got the awards he deserved as director and actor, the award he got (the only Academy Award he has ever got) was as co-author of the Best Original Screenplay."
According to film biographer David Thomson, however, "No one can now deny
Herman Mankiewicz credit for the germ, shape, and pointed language of the
screenplay..."[12] And film historian Robert L. Carringer, after weighing both
sides of the argument, including sworn testimony from Mercury assistant
Richard Baer, could only conclude "We will probably never know for sure, but
in any case Welles had at last found a subject with the right combination of
monumentality, timeliness, and audacity."[4]:17 Harlan Lebo agrees, and adds,
"of far greater relevance is reaffirming the importance of the efforts that
both men contributed to the creation of Hollywood's greatest motion
picture."[5]:32

### [edit] Sources

#### [edit] William Randolph Hearst

The principal source for the story of Citizen Kane was the life of media
tycoon William Randolph Hearst, and the film is seen by critics as a
fictionalized, unrelentingly hostile parody of Hearst. According to film
historian Don Kilbourne, "much of the information for Citizen Kane came from
already-published material about Hearst... [and] some of Kane's speeches are
almost verbatim copies of Hearst's. When Welles denied that the film was about
the still-influential publisher, he did not convince many people."[9]:222

Welles himself insisted that there were also differences between the men. In
1968, he told Peter Bogdanovich, "You know, the real story of Hearst is quite
different from Kane's. And Hearst himselfâ-as a man, I meanâ-was very
different." In his documentary F for Fake, Welles claims Kane was originally
intended to be based on Howard Hughes (who was to be played by Joseph Cotten)
but he later changed it to Hearst. Hearst's biographer, David Nasaw, finds the
film's depiction of Hearst unfair:

> Welles' Kane is a cartoon-like caricature of a man who is hollowed out on
the inside, forlorn, defeated, solitary because he cannot command the total
obedience, loyalty, devotion, and love of those around him. Hearst, to the
contrary, never regarded himself as a failure, never recognized defeat, never
stopped loving Marion [Davies] or his wife. He did not, at the end of his
life, run away from the world to entomb himself in a vast, gloomy art-choked
hermitage.[13]

#### [edit] Susan Alexander

Brulatour's second and third wives, Dorothy Gibson and Hope Hampton, both
fleeting stars of the silent screen who later had marginal careers in opera,
are believed to have provided inspiration for the Susan Alexander character.

Orson Welles also claimed that Harold Fowler McCormick's lavish promotion of
his second wife, Ganna Walska, was a direct influence on the screenplay.
McCormick spent thousands of dollars on voice lessons for her and even
arranged for Walska to take the lead in a production of Zaza at the Chicago
Opera in 1920. Like the Susan Alexander character, she had a terrible voice,
pleasing only to McCormick. But unlike Alexander, Walska got into an argument
with director Pietro Cimini during dress rehearsal and stormed out of the
production before she appeared. Roger Ebert, in his DVD commentary on Citizen
Kane, also suggests that the Alexander character was based on Walska, and had
very little to do with Marion Davies.[14] The film's composer Bernard Herrmann
also suggests that Kane is based on McCormick but also in great part on Welles
himself.[15]

Other sources say the Alexander role â and the disastrous opera singing â
is a composite of Hampton, Davies, Walska, and the story of Samuel Insull, who
built the Chicago Civic Opera House in 1929 for his daughter, who hoped to
become famous and sing at the Metropolitan Opera but never did.

#### [edit] Samuel Insull

Citizen Kane is in part based on the life of Samuel Insull and his wife
Gladys. Playwright Herman J. Mankiewicz based Susan Alexanderâs catastrophic
operatic debut in Citizen Kane on Gladys Wallis Insullâs New York role as
Lady Teazle in a charity revival of The School for Scandal.[16] The review of
Susan Alexander's debut in Kane echoes Mankiewicz's actual 1925 review of
Gladys Insull. His 1925 review began: "As Lady Teazle, Mrs. Insull is as
pretty as she is diminutive; with a clear smile and dainty gestures. There is
a charming grace in her bearing that makes for excellent deportment. But Lady
Teazle seems much too innocent to lend credit to her part in the play."

#### [edit] Welles as Kane

<IMG>

<IMG>

Orson Welles as Charles Foster Kane

There are autobiographical elements to the film. Orson Welles lost his mother
when he was only nine years old and his father when he was 15. After this, he
became the ward of Chicago's Dr. Maurice Bernstein--and Bernstein is the last
name of the only major character in Citizen Kane who receives a completely
positive portrayal.

The documentary The Battle Over Citizen Kane points out the great irony that
Welles's own life story resembled that of Kane far more than Hearst's: an
overreaching wunderkind who ended up mournful and lonely in his old age.
Citizen Kane's editor Robert Wise summarized: "Well, I thought often
afterwards, only in recent years when I saw the film again two or three years
ago when they had the fiftieth anniversary, and I suddenly thought to myself,
well, Orson was doing an autobiographical film and didn't realize it, because
it's rather much the same, you know. You start here, and you have a big rise
and tremendous prominence and fame and success and whatnot, and then tail off
and tail off and tail off. And at least the arc of the two lives were very
much the same..."[1]

Peter Bogdanovich, who was friends with Welles in his later years, disagreed
with this on his own commentary on the Citizen Kane DVD, saying that Kane was
nothing like Welles. Kane, he said, "had none of the qualities of an artist,
Orson had all the qualities of an artist." Bogdanovich also noted that Welles
was never bitter "about all the bad things that happened to him," and was a
man who enjoyed life in his final years.

#### [edit] Charles F. Murphy

The character of political boss Jim Gettys is based on Charles F. Murphy, a
political leader in New York City's infamous Tammany Hall political machine,
who was an enemy of Hearst. In one scene Gettys admonishes Kane for printing a
cartoon showing him in prison stripes. This is based on the fact that Murphy,
who was a horse-cart driver and owned several bars, was depicted in a 1903
Hearst cartoon wearing striped prison clothes. A caption, referring to the
restaurant Murphy frequented, said: "Look out, Murphy. Itâs a short lock-
step from Delmonicoâs to Sing Sing."

#### [edit] Rosebud

According to Welles author David Thomson, âRosebud is the greatest secret in
cinemaâ¦â [12]:801 [17]

Orson Welles, explaining the idea behind the word "Rosebud," said, "It's a
gimmick, really, and rather dollar-book Freud."[18] The symbolic sled
'Rosebud' used in the film was bought for $60,500 by film director Steven
Spielberg in 1982, at the time the highest price paid for a piece of film
memorabilia.[19] Spielberg commented, "Rosebud will go over my typewriter to
remind me that quality in movies comes first."[20][21] According to Peter
Bogdanovich, Welles' reaction to Spielberg's purchase of the sled was "I
thought we burned it..."

According to Louis Pizzitola, author of Hearst Over Hollywood, "Rosebud" was a
nickname that Orrin Peck, a friend of William Randolph Hearst, gave to his
mother, Phoebe Hearst.[22] It was said that Phoebe was as close, or even
closer, to Orrin than she was to her own son, lending a bitter-sweet element
to the word's use in a film about a boy being separated from his mother's
love.

In 1989, essayist Gore Vidal cited contemporary rumors that "Rosebud" was a
nickname Hearst used for his mistress Marion Davies; a reference to her
clitoris,[23][24] a claim repeated as fact in the 1996 documentary The Battle
Over Citizen Kane and again in the 1999 dramatic film RKO 281. A resultant
joke noted, with heavy innuendo, that Hearst and/or Kane died "with 'Rosebud'
on his lips."[1]

## [edit] Production

During production, Citizen Kane was referred to as RKO 281. Filming took place
between June 29, 1940 and October 23, 1940 in what is now Stage 19 on the
Paramount lot in Hollywood. Welles prevented studio executives of RKO from
visiting the set. He understood their desire to control projects and he knew
they were expecting him to do an exciting film that would correspond to his
The War of the Worlds radio broadcast. Welles' RKO contract had given him
complete control over the production of the film when he signed on with the
studio, something that he never again was allowed to exercise when making
motion pictures.

### [edit] Filmmaking innovations

#### [edit] Cinematography

<IMG>

<IMG>

A deep focus shot: everything, including the hat in the foreground and the boy
in the distance, is in sharp focus.

Film scholars and historians view Citizen Kane as Welles' attempt to create a
new style of filmmaking by studying various forms of movie making, and
combining them all into one. The most innovative technical aspect of Citizen
Kane is the extended use of deep focus.[25] In nearly every scene in the film,
the foreground, background and everything in between are all in sharp focus.
This was done by renowned cinematographer Gregg Toland through his
experimentation with lenses and lighting. Specifically, Toland often used
telephoto lenses to shoot close-up scenes. Any time deep focus was impossible
â for example in the scene when Kane finishes a bad review of Alexander's
opera while at the same time firing the person who started the review â
Toland used an optical printer to make the whole screen appear in focus
(visually layering one piece of film onto another). However, some apparently
deep-focus shots were the result of in-camera effects, as in the famous
example of the scene where Kane breaks into Susan Alexander's room after her
suicide attempt. In the background, Kane and another man break into the room,
while simultaneously the medicine bottle and a glass with a spoon in it are in
closeup in the foreground. The shot was an in-camera matte shot. The
foreground was shot first, with the background dark. Then the background was
lit, the foreground darkened, the film rewound, and the scene re-shot with the
background action.

Another unorthodox method used in the film was the way low-angle shots were
used to display a point of view facing upwards, thus allowing ceilings to be
shown in the background of several scenes.[26] Since movies were primarily
filmed on sound stages and not on location during the era of the Hollywood
studio system, it was impossible to film at an angle that showed ceilings
because the stages had none. In some instances, Welles' crew used muslin
draped above the set to produce the illusion of a regular room with a ceiling,
while the boom mikes were hidden above the cloth.

#### [edit] Time compression

One of the story-telling techniques introduced in this film was using an
episodic sequence on the same set while the characters changed costume and
make-up between cuts so that the scene following each cut would look as if it
took place in the same location, but at a time long after the previous cut. In
this way, Welles chronicled the breakdown of Kane's first marriage, which took
years of story time, in a matter of minutes.

#### [edit] Special effects

Welles also pioneered several visual effects in order to cheaply shoot things
like crowd scenes and large interior spaces. For example, the scene where the
camera in the opera house rises dramatically to the rafters to show the
workmen showing a lack of appreciation for the second Mrs. Kane's performance
was shot by panning a camera upwards over the performance scene, then a
curtain wipe to a miniature of the upper regions of the house, and then
another curtain wipe matching it again with the scene of the workmen. Other
scenes effectively employed miniatures to make the film look much more
expensive than it truly was, such as various shots of Xanadu. A loud, full
screen closeup of the typewriter typing a single word magnifies the review for
the Chicago Inquirerâ"weak".[27]

#### [edit] Makeup

The film broke new ground with its use of special effects makeup, created by
makeup artist Maurice Seiderman, believably aging the cast many decades over
the course of the story.

#### [edit] Soundtrack

Welles brought his experience with sound from radio along to filmmaking,
producing a layered and complex soundtrack. In one scene, the elderly Kane
strikes Susan in a tent on the beach, and the two characters silently glower
at each other while a woman at the nearby party can be heard hysterically
laughing in the background, her giddiness in grotesque counterpoint to the
misery of Susan and Kane. Elsewhere, Welles skillfully employed reverberation
to create a mood, such as the chilly echo of the monumental Thatcher library,
where the reporter is confronted by an intimidating, officious librarian.

In addition to expanding on the potential of sound as a creator of moods and
emotions, Welles pioneered a new aural technique, known as the "lightning-
mix". Welles used this technique to link complex montage sequences via a
series of related sounds or phrases. In offering a continuous sound track,
Welles was able to join what would otherwise be extremely rough cuts together
into a smooth narrative. For example, the audience witnesses Kane grow from a
child into a young man in just two shots. As Kane's guardian hands him his
sled, Kane begrudingly wishes him a "Merry Christmas". Suddenly we are taken
to a shot of his guardian fifteen years later, only to have the phrase
completed for us: "and a Happy New Year". In this case, the continuity of the
soundtrack, not the image, is what makes for a seamless narrative
structure.[28]

Welles also carried over techniques from radio not yet popular in the movies
(though they would become staples). Using a number of voices, each saying a
sentence or sometimes merely a fragment of a sentence, and splicing the
dialogue together in quick succession, the result gave the impression of a
whole town talking - and, equally important, what the town was talking about.
Welles also favored the overlapping of dialogue, considering it more realistic
than the stage and movie tradition of characters not stepping on each other's
sentences. He also pioneered the technique of putting the audio ahead of the
visual in scene transitions (an L-cut); as a scene would come to a close, the
audio would transition to the next scene before the visuals did.

### [edit] Music

In common with using personnel he had previously worked with in the Mercury
Theatre, Welles recruited his close friend Bernard Herrmann to score Citizen
Kane.[29] Herrmann was longtime collaborator of Welles, providing music for
several radio broadcasts including the War of the Worlds broadcast.[30] The
film was Herrmann's first motion picture score[29] and would be nominated for
an Academy Award for Original Music Score but would lose out to his own score
for the film All That Money Can Buy.[29]

Herrmann's score for Citizen Kane was a watershed in film soundtrack
composition and proved as influential as any of the films other innovations
and established him as an important voice in film soundtrack
composition.[15][30] The score eschewed the typical Hollywood practice of
scoring a film with virtually non-stop music. Instead Herrmann used what he
later described as '"radio scoring", musical cues which typically lasted
between five and fifteen seconds to bridge the action or suggest a different
emotional response. In the opening sequence, the tour of Kane's estate,
Xanadu, Herrmann introduces a leitmotiv which reoccurs throughout the film.
Much of the music used in the newsreel was taken from other sources,examples
include the News on the March music which was taken from RKO's music library,
Belgian March by Anthony Collins accompanies the newsreel titles and an
excerpt from Alfred Newman's score for Gunga Din is used as the background for
the exploration of Xanadu.[30] In the final sequence of the film, which shows
the destruction of Rosebud in the fireplace of Kaneâs castle, Welles
choreographed the scene while he had Herrmannâs cue playing on the set.[31]

For the famous operatic sequence which exposed Kane's protege Susan Alexander
for the amateur she was, Herrmann created a brand new piece The Aria from
SalammbÃ³.[15] An original piece was used as there is no major opera where the
female soprano leads off.[30] Herrmann put the Aria in a key that would force
the singer to strain to reach the high notes, culminating in a high D, well
outside the range of Alexander.[15][30] Herrmann said he wanted to convey the
impression of a terrified girl floundering in the quicksand of a powerful
orchestra.[15] On the soundtrack it was soprano Jean Forward who actually sang
the vocal part for actress Dorothy Comingore.[15]

In 1972 Herrmann said "I was fortunate to start my career with a film like
Citizen Kane, it's been a downhill run ever since!".[30] Shortly before his
death in 1985, Welles told director Henry Jaglom that that the score was fifty
per cent responsible for the filmâs artistic success. [30]

However, Herrmann was vocal in his criticism of Pauline Kael's claim not only
on her position that it was Mankiewicz, not Welles, who made the main thrust
of the film but also in her assumptions about the use of music in the film
without consulting him:

    Pauline Kael has written in The Citizen Kane Book (1971), that the production wanted to use Massenetâs "Thais" but could not afford the fee. "But Miss Kael never wrote or approached me to ask about the music. We could easily have afforded the fee. The point is that its lovely little strings would not have served the emotional purpose of the film."[32]
## [edit] Reception

<IMG>

<IMG>

NY City premiere, May 1, 1941

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dolores del Rio and Orson Welles at the premiere of Citizen Kane in 1941

In a 1941 review, Jorge Luis Borges called Citizen Kane a "metaphysical
detective story," in that "... [its] subject (both psychological and
allegorical) is the investigation of a man's inner self, through the works he
has wrought, the words he has spoken, the many lives he has ruined..." Borges
noted that "Overwhelmingly, endlessly, Orson Welles shows fragments of the
life of the man, Charles Foster Kane, and invites us to combine them and
reconstruct him." As well, "Forms of multiplicity and incongruity abound in
the film: the first scenes record the treasures amassed by Kane; in one of the
last, a poor woman, luxuriant and suffering, plays with an enormous jigsaw
puzzle on the floor of a palace that is also a museum." Borges points out, "At
the end we realize that the fragments are not governed by a secret unity: the
detested Charles Foster Kane is a simulacrum, a chaos of appearances."[33]

Despite numerous positive reviews from critics at the time,[34] the film was
not a box office success, just making back enough to cover the budget, but not
enough to make a profit.

Due to the Second World War, Citizen Kane was little seen and virtually
forgotten until its release in Europe in 1946, where it gained considerable
acclaim, particularly from French film critics such as AndrÃ© Bazin. In the
United States, it was neglected and forgotten until its revival on television
in the mid-1950s, and its critical fortunes have been significantly
transformed since then. Critics worldwide began listing it among the best
films ever made. The Sight & Sound Top Ten list, revised every ten years,
began in 1952 and first listed Citizen Kane in 1962.[35]

### [edit] Hearst's response

Hearing about the film enraged Hearst so much that he offered RKO Pictures
$800,000 to destroy all prints of the film and burn the negative. Although it
is often said that Hearst was upset because the film was about him, one
alternative theory is that Hearst was more upset about the portrayal of Marion
Davies (as singer Susan Alexander) than himself in the film.

When RKO rejected Hearst's offer to suppress the film, Hearst banned every
newspaper and station in his media conglomerate from reviewing - or even
mentioning - the movie. The documentary The Battle Over Citizen Kane lays the
blame for Citizen Kane's relative failure squarely at the feet of Hearst. Even
though it did decent business at the box-office and went on to be the sixth
highest grossing film in its year of release, this fell short of its creators'
expectations but was still acceptable to its backers. In The Chief: The Life
of William Randolph Hearst, David Nasaw points out that Hearst's actions were
not the only reason Kane failed, however: the innovations Welles made with
narrative, as well as the dark message at the heart of the film (that the
pursuit of success is ultimately futile) meant that a popular audience could
not appreciate its merits (Nasaw, 572-573).

In a pair of Arena documentaries about Welles' career produced and broadcast
domestically by the BBC in 1982, Welles claimed that during opening week, a
policeman approached him one night and told him: "Do not go to your hotel room
tonight; Hearst has set up an undressed,underage girl to leap into your arms
when you enter and a photographer to take pictures of you. Hearst is planning
to publish it in all of his papers". Welles thanked the man and stayed out all
night. However, it is not confirmed whether this was true. Welles also
described his only meeting with William Randolph Hearst: in an elevator in a
building in San Francisco, where the film was being premiered. Welles offered
Hearst some free tickets but the tycoon declined to answer; Welles later
stated that Charles Foster Kane would probably have accepted the offer.

Although Hearst's efforts to suppress it damaged the film's success, they
backfired in the long run, since almost every reference of Hearst's life and
career made today typically includes a reference to the film's parallel to it.
The irony of Hearst's efforts is that the film is now inexorably connected to
him. This connection was reinforced by the publication in 1961 of W. A.
Swanberg's extensive biography titled Citizen Hearst.

## [edit] Awards and honors

<IMG>

<IMG>

Theatrical release poster

### [edit] Academy Awards - 1941

Win: [36]

  * Best Original Screenplay \- Herman J. Mankiewicz and Orson Welles

Nominations:

  * Best Director \- Orson Welles
  * Best Actor \- Orson Welles
  * Best Film Editing \- Robert Wise
  * Best Picture
  * Best Art Direction \- Perry Ferguson, A. Roland Fields, Van Nest Polglase, Darrell Silvera
  * Best Cinematography (black and white) \- Gregg Toland
  * Best Sound Mixing \- John Aalberg
  * Best Music Score \- Bernard Herrmann

Boos were heard almost every time Citizen Kane was referred to during the
Oscars ceremony that year.[37] Most of Hollywood did not want the film to see
the light of day considering the threats that William Randolph Hearst had made
if it did.

In December 2007, Welles' Oscar for best original screenplay came up for
auction at Sotheby's in New York, but failed to reach its estimate of $800,000
to $1.2 million.[38] The Oscar which was believed to have been lost by Welles
was rediscovered in 1994 and is owned by the Dax Foundation, a Los Angeles
based charity.[38] At the same sale Welles' personal copy of the last revised
draft of Citizen Kane before the shooting script did sell for $97,000.[38]

### [edit] Others

The National Board of Review gave 1941 "Best Acting" awards to Orson Welles
and George Coulouris, and the film itself "Best Picture." That same year, the
New York Times named it one of the Ten Best Films of the year, and the New
York Film Critics Circle Award for "Best Picture" also went to Citizen
Kane.[39]

## [edit] Recognition

In 1989, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally,
historically, or aesthetically significant" and selected it for preservation
in the National Film Registry. Beginning in 1962, and every ten years since,
it has been voted the best film ever made by the Sight and Sound poll of film
critics and directors. The film has also ranked number one in the following
film "best of" lists: Editorial Jaguar, FIAF Centenary List, France Critics
Top 10, Cahiers du cinÃ©ma 100 films pour une cinÃ©mathÃ¨que idÃ©ale[40],
Kinovedcheskie Russia Top 10, Romanian Critics Top 10, Time Out Magazine
Greatest Films, and Village Voice 100 Greatest Films. Roger Ebert called
Citizen Kane the greatest movie ever made.[1]

American Film Institute recognition

  * 1998 - AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies \- #1
  * 2005 - AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes: 
    * "Rosebud" #17
  * 2007 - AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) \- #1

### [edit] Criticism

Despite its status, Citizen Kane is not entirely without its critics. Boston
University film scholar Ray Carney, although noting its technical
achievements, criticized what he saw as the film's lack of emotional depth,
shallow characterization and empty metaphors. Listing it among the most
overrated works within the film community, he accused the film of being "an
all-American triumph of style over substance... indistinguishable from the
opera production within it: attempting to conceal the banality of its
performances by wrapping them in a thousand layers of acoustic and visual
processing". Of its director, he went on to state, "Welles is Kane â in a
sense he couldn't have intended â substituting razzle-dazzle for truth and
hoping no one notices the sleight of hand". He also criticized critics and
scholars for allowing themselves to be pandered to, stating "critics obviously
enjoy being told what to think or they'd never sit still for the hammy acting,
cartoon characterizations, tendentious photography, editorializing blockings,
and absurdly grandiose (and annoyingly insistent) metaphors....When will film
studies grow up? Even Jedediah Leland, the opera reviewer in the film, knew
better than to be taken in by Salammbo's empty reverberations."[41] The
Swedish director Ingmar Bergman once stated his dislike for the movie, calling
it "a total bore" and claiming that the "performances are worthless". He went
on to call Orson Welles an "infinitely overrated filmmaker".[42]

Similarly, James Agate wrote, "I thought the photography quite good, but
nothing to write to Moscow about, the acting middling, and the whole thing a
little dull...Mr. Welles's high-brow direction is of that super-clever order
which prevents you from seeing what that which is being directed is all
about."[43]

## [edit] Prints

Welles' original master film negative of Citizen Kane was destroyed in a fire
in the 1970s at his villa in Madrid, Spain, along with the only known print of
Welles' 1938 short film Too Much Johnson. Until 1991, all existing theatrical
prints of the film were made from copies of the original. When the rights to
the film were purchased by Ted Turner's Turner Entertainment (which bought the
rights to the MGM and RKO film libraries), film restoration techniques were
used to produce a pristine print for a 50th Anniversary theatrical revival
reissue in 1991 (released by Paramount Pictures). The 2003 British DVD edition
is taken from an interpositive held by the British Film Institute. The current
US DVD version (released by Warner Home Video) is taken from another digital
restoration, supervised by Turner. The transfer to Region 1 DVD has been
criticised by some film experts for being too bright. Also, in the scene in
Bernstein's office (chapter 10) rain falling outside the window has been
digitally erased, probably because it was thought to be excessive film grain.
These alterations are not present in the UK Region 2, which is also considered
to be more accurate in terms of contrast and brightness.

In 2003, Orson Welles' daughter Beatrice sued Turner Entertainment and RKO
Pictures, claiming that the Welles estate is the legal copyright holder of the
film. Her attorney said that Orson Welles had left RKO with an exit deal
terminating his contracts with the studio, meaning that Welles still had an
interest in the film and his previous contract giving the studio the copyright
of the film was null and void. Beatrice Welles also claimed that, if the
courts did not uphold her claim of copyright, RKO nevertheless owed the estate
20% of the profits, from a previous contract which has not been lived up to.

On May 30, 2007, the appeals panel agreed that Beatrice Welles could proceed
with the lawsuit against Turner Entertainment, the opinion partially overturns
the 2004 decision by a lower court judge who had found in favor of Turner
Entertainment on the issue of video rights.[44]

In the 1980s, this film became the catalyst in the controversy over the
colorization of black and white films. When Ted Turner told members of the
press that he was considering colorizing Citizen Kane, his comments led to an
immediate public outcry. Welles supposedly told friends that he intended to
"keep Ted Turner and his goddamned Crayolas away from my movie." The uproar
was for naught, as Turner Pictures had never actually announced that this was
an upcoming planned project. Turner later claimed that this was a joke
designed to needle colorization critics, and that he had never had any
intention of colorizing the film. Turner could not have colorized the film had
he wanted to. Welles' original contract prevented any alteration to the film
without his, and eventually his estate's, express consent.[45]

## [edit] See also

  * RKO 281
  * Beyond Citizen Kane
  * The Battle Over Citizen Kane
  * Films that have been considered the greatest ever
  * Twist ending

## [edit] References

### [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b c Epstein, Michael and Thomas Lennon. "The Battle Over Citizen Kane." PBS, 1996. Retrieved: January 14, 2008.
  2. ^ "Critics' Top Ten Poll". British Film Institute. 2002. http://www.bfi.org.uk/sightandsound/topten/poll/critics.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-14.
  3. ^ "Directors' Top Ten Poll". British Film Institute. 2002. http://www.bfi.org.uk/sightandsound/topten/poll/directors.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-14.
  4. ^ a b Carringer, Robert L. The Making of Citizen Kane, (2nd ed., revised) University of California Press (1996)
  5. ^ a b c d e f g h i Lebo, Harlan. Citizen Kane: Fiftieth Anniversary Album, Doubleday Publishing (1990)
  6. ^ Heylin, Clinton. Despite the System: Orson Welles Versus the Hollywood Studios, Chicago Review Press (2006)
  7. ^ a b c Callow, Simon (1995). "Orson Welles: The Road to Xanadu". Penguin Books. pp. 484.
  8. ^ a b c d e Kael, Pauline. For Keeps, Penguin Books (1994), republished section from Raising Kane, 1971
  9. ^ a b Kilbourne, Don. Dictionary of Literary Biography: American Screenwriters, Gale Research Co. (1984)
  10. ^ Meryman, Richard. Mank, William Morrow, (1978)
  11. ^ a b Friedrich, Otto, City of Nets - a portrait of Hollywood in the 1940's, (1986) Harper & Row
  12. ^ a b Thomson, David, A Biographical Dictionary of Film, 3rd, ed. (1995) Alfred A. Knopf
  13. ^ Nasaw, David (2000). "The Chief: The Life of William Randolph Hearst". Houghton Mifflin. pp. 574.
  14. ^ Ebert, Roger (2001). "Citizen Kane DVD commentary". Turner Home Entertainment.
  15. ^ a b c d e f "American Composers Orchestra - David Raksin remembers his colleagues". Americancomposers.org. http://www.americancomposers.org/raksin_herrmann.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-22.
  16. ^ Higham, Charles, Orson Welles: Rise and Fall of an American Genius, (2002)
  17. ^ Thomson, David, The Story of Orson Welles (1996) Vintage Books
  18. ^ Kael, Pauline, The Citizen Kane Book, Boston, 1971).
  19. ^ "Movie Meoribilia". NYTimes.com. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9A0DE4DF1E30F934A3575AC0A960948260. Retrieved on 2009-22-01.
  20. ^ Video Viewer (August, 1982).
  21. ^ Time Magazine, Monday, June 21, 1982
  22. ^ Pizzitola, Louis. "Hearst Over Hollywood." Columbia University Press, 2002.
  23. ^ Vidal, Gore. "Remembering Orson Welles." New York Times, June 1, 1989. Retrieved: 14 January 2008.
  24. ^ Vidal, Gore. "Rosebud." New York Times, August 17, 1989. Retrieved: 14 January 2008.
  25. ^ Ogle, Patrick L; Bill Nichols (1985). "Technological and Aesthetic Influences Upon the Development of Deep Focus Cinematography in the United States". Movies and Methods (University of California Press): pp. 73.
  26. ^ Toland, Gregg (September 1941). "The Motion Picture Cameraman". Theater Arts magazine. http://www.wellesnet.com/?p=178. Retrieved on 2008-01-14.
  27. ^ Thomas, FranÃ§ois. Naremore, James. ed. Citizen Kane: The Sound Track, in Orson Welles's Citizen Kane: A Casebook. US: Oxford University Press via Google Books limited preview. pp. 173\. ISBN 0-1951-5891-1. http://books.google.com/books?id=KzCH4UgSUr8C&pg=PA173. Retrieved on 2007-11-10.
  28. ^ Cook, 330.
  29. ^ a b c "Bernard Herrmann". Moviemusicuk.us. http://www.moviemusicuk.us/herrmann.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-22.
  30. ^ a b c d e f g Smith, Stephen C. (2002). A Heart at Fire's Center: The Life and Music of Bernard Herrmann. University of California Press. pp. 76-84. ISBN 0520229398.
  31. ^ "Sound and Vision:The New Yorker". NewYorker.com. http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2005/06/27/050627crmu_music. Retrieved on 2009-01-22.
  32. ^ Wellesnet: The Orson Welles Web Resource Â» Blog Archive Â» BERNARD HERRMANN on working with ORSON WELLES and CITIZEN KANE
  33. ^ Borges, Jorge Luis. Selected Non-Fictions. New York: Viking Press, 1999. ISBN 0-14029-011-7.
  34. ^ Griffith, Richard; Arthur Mayer and Eileen Bowser (1981). "The Movies". Simon and Schuster.
  35. ^ "The Sight & Sound Top Ten Poll: 1962". British Film Institute. 1962. http://www.bfi.org.uk/sightandsound/topten/history/1962.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-14.
  36. ^ "NY Times: Citizen Kane". NY Times. http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/9737/Citizen-Kane/details. Retrieved on 2008-12-13.
  37. ^ Robert Wise's interview, found in The Battle Over Citizen Kane, PBS
  38. ^ a b c "'Citizen Kane' Script sells for $97,000". Washingtonpost.com. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/12/11/AR2007121101455.html. Retrieved on 2009-22-01.
  39. ^ Allmovie Awards
  40. ^ Cahiers du cinÃ©ma 100 films pour une cinÃ©mathÃ¨que idÃ©ale
  41. ^ Carney on Culture: Over-Rated Films
  42. ^ http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Ingmar_Bergman#Jan_Aghed_interview_.282002.29
  43. ^ Tookeys Film Guide - Film Reviews since 1902
  44. ^ Heir to sue for 'Citizen Kane' video rights ABC local, retrieved May 31, 2007
  45. ^ American Notes Hollywood - Kane Steals Ted's Crayons. Time Magazine February 27, 1989

### [edit] Bibliography

  * Bogdanovich, Peter and Welles, Orson This Is Orson Welles, HarperPerennial 1992, ISBN 0-06-092439-X
  * Callow, Simon. Orson Welles : Hello Americans London: Johnathon Cape, 2006. ISBN 0-224-038-532.
  * Carringer, Robert L. The Making of Citizen Kane. University of California Press, 1985. ISBN 0-520-05876-3.
  * Gottesman, Ronald, ed. Focus on Citizen Kane. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1971.
  * Heylin, Clinton. Despite the System: Orson Welles Versus the Hollywood Studios, Chicago Review Press, 2005.
  * Nasaw, David. The Chief: The Life of William Randolph Hearst.New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2000.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Citizen
Kane  
  * Citizen Kane at the Internet Movie Database
  * Citizen Kane at Allmovie
  * Citizen Kane at Rotten Tomatoes
  * Citizen Kane bibliography via the UC Berkeley Media Resources Center
  * The American Film Institute's "100 Greatest Movies" list
  * PBS: Citizen Kane
  * Bright Lights Film Journal Essay
  * Roger Ebert: Citizen Kane
  * Time Magazine Top 100
  * Greatest films
  * DVD Review

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Films by Orson Welles  
1940s

Citizen Kane (1941)  â¢ The Magnificent Ambersons (1942)  â¢ The Stranger
(1946)  â¢ The Lady from Shanghai (1947)  â¢ Macbeth (1948)  
1950s

Othello (1952) â¢ Mr. Arkadin (1955) â¢ Touch of Evil (1958)  
1960s

The Trial (1962)  â¢ Chimes at Midnight (1965)  â¢ The Immortal Story (1968)  
1970s

The Other Side of the Wind (1972)  â¢ F for Fake (1974)  â¢ Filming Othello
(1978)  
Other Work

The Hearts of Age (1934)  â¢ Too Much Johnson (1938)  â¢ It's All True
(1942)  â¢ Don Quixote (1956-1971)  â¢ The Fountain Of Youth (1958)  â¢ The
Dreamers (1980-1982)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Citizen_Kane"

Categories: 1941 films | Black and white films | Expressionist film |
Directorial debut films | 1940s drama films | Fictional media moguls | Films
set in the 1890s | Films set in the 1900s | Films set in the 1910s | Films set
in the 1920s | Films set in the 1930s | Films about the media | Films directed
by Orson Welles | Films set in New York City | Films whose writer won the Best
Original Screenplay Academy Award | RKO films | Films shot in San Diego |
United States National Film Registry films

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Bosanski
  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 22:48.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



