
# Eastern Promises

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Eastern Promises  
<IMG>  
Directed by David Cronenberg  
Produced by Paul Webster  
Robert Lantos  
Written by Steven Knight  
Starring Viggo Mortensen  
Naomi Watts  
Vincent Cassel  
Armin Mueller-Stahl  
Music by Howard Shore  
Cinematography Peter Suschitzky  
Editing by Ronald Sanders  
Studio BBC Films  
TÃ©lÃ©film Canada  
Distributed by Focus Features (USA)  
Alliance Films (Canada)  
PathÃ© (UK)  
Release date(s) September 8, 2007  
Running time 100 min.  
Country <IMG> United Kingdom  
<IMG> Canada  
<IMG> United States  
Language English  
Russian  
Turkish  
Ukrainian  
Gross revenue $51,202,291 (worldwide)  
Eastern Promises is a 2007 crime drama film directed by David Cronenberg, from
a screenplay written by Steven Knight. The film tells of a British midwife's
interactions with the Russian Mafia in London and stars Viggo Mortensen, Naomi
Watts and Vincent Cassel. Principal photography began November 2006, in
locations in and around London. The film has been noted for its plot twist and
for its violence and realistic depiction of the Russian criminal
underworld[citation needed], including its use of tattoos.[citation needed]

The film premiered September 8, 2007 at the Toronto International Film
Festival, September 20, 2007 in Europe at the San Sebastian International Film
Festival and went on general release in North America on September 21, 2007.
The film was released in the United Kingdom on October 26, 2007. As of January
31, 2008, the film has grossed $51,202,291 worldwide and has received a
positive critical reception, appearing on several US critics' "top ten films"
lists for 2007. Eastern Promises has won several awards, including the
Audience Prize for best film at the Toronto International Film Festival and
the Best Actor award for Mortensen at the 2007 British Independent Film
Awards. The film received twelve Genie Award nominations, three Golden Globe
Award nominations, and Mortensen was nominated for Best Actor at the 80th
Academy Awards, losing to Daniel Day-Lewis.

## Contents

  * 1 Plot
  * 2 Cast
  * 3 Production
    * 3.1 Locations
    * 3.2 Tattoos
    * 3.3 Violence
  * 4 Director's commentary
  * 5 Release
  * 6 Reception
  * 7 Awards and nominations
    * 7.1 Genie Awards
    * 7.2 Top ten lists
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links
    * 9.1 Interviews

  
## [edit] Plot

The movie opens with a murder in a barber shop. Later, Anna Khitrova (Naomi
Watts), a midwife at a London hospital, finds a Russian-language diary on the
body of Tatiana, a fourteen-year-old girl who dies in childbirth. She also
finds a card for the Trans-Siberian restaurant, which is owned by Semyon
(Armin Mueller-Stahl), a boss in the Russian Mafia or vory v zakone ("thieves
in law"). Anna sets out to track down the girl's family so that she can find a
home for the dead mother's baby girl. Annaâs mother Helen (SinÃ©ad Cusack)
does not discourage her, but Annaâs Kiev-born uncle Stepan (Jerzy
Skolimowski), whom Anna asks for help with translation of the diary, urges
caution. Through Semyon and her uncle, Anna comes to learn that Semyon and his
bumbling and unstable son, Kirill (Vincent Cassel), had abused Tatiana and
forced her into prostitution, and that Semyon had raped the girl.

Kirill's driver is the Russian-born Nikolai Luzhin (Viggo Mortensen), who also
serves as the family's "undertaker", dumping dead bodies in the River Thames.
Nikolai's star rises within the vory, due in part to Nikolai's protection of
Kirill, who had authorized a hit on a rival Chechen vory leader (who had been
making suggestions about Kirill's possible homosexuality, which is also
suggested by other scenes and incidents in the film). The hit was not approved
by Semyon and was ill-advised, with the Chechen's brothers coming to England
to seek vengeance. Semyon, afraid for his son's safety, hatches a plan. Semyon
arranges to give "Kirill" up to the Chechens, which involves making Nikolai a
Lieutenant in the vory, the same rank as Kirill, so he gets the same
distinctive tattoos (stars over the left and right side of his chest). A
meeting is arranged at Finsbury steam baths, and the Chechens are told that
the tattooed Nikolai is actually Kirill. The Chechens attack Nikolai with
knives, but Nikolai is able to kill them both. Nikolai is seriously wounded
and is admitted to the hospital where Anna works.

Anna asks Nikolai where her missing uncle Stepan is. Nikolai says he sent
Stepan to a luxury hotel in Edinburgh to keep him safe after he read Tatiana's
diary. Anna discovers that Kirill has kidnapped the baby, to prevent her being
evidence in a rape case against Semyon. Anna and Nikolai go to the Thames and
find Kirill with the baby, still alive, struggling with his conscience.
Nikolai talks Kirill into giving Anna the baby and allying with Nikolai
against Semyon.

It is revealed near the end of the film that Nikolai is actually a member of
the Russian Security Services (FSB) and a Scotland Yard informer on the
Russian mafia in London as part of his undercover duties. Nikolai was able to
read Tatiana's diary before Semyon destroyed it, and develops a plan to have
Semyon arrested and convicted for Tatiana's rape, making Kirill the most
powerful member of the London branch of the mob, but with Nikolai as the power
behind the throne. The plan works, with Anna gaining custody of the baby and
Nikolai eventually becoming the London vory crime boss.

## [edit] Cast

  * Viggo Mortensen as Nikolai Luzhin
  * Naomi Watts as Anna Khitrova
  * Vincent Cassel as Kirill
  * Armin Mueller-Stahl as Semyon
  * Jerzy Skolimowski as Stepan
  * Mina E. Mina as Azim
  * Josef Altin as Ekrem
  * SinÃ©ad Cusack as Helen
  * Donald Sumpter as Yuri
  * Sarah-Jeanne Labrosse as Tatiana
  * Tatiana Maslany, voice of Tatiana
  * Olegar Fedoro as Tattooist
  * Igor Outkine, accordionist and singer in the birthday party scene

## [edit] Production

### [edit] Locations

Shooting began in November 2006, and various scenes were filmed in St John
Street, Farringdon, London. Filming also took place in Broadway Market,
Hackney.

The "Trans-Siberian Restaurant" is located in The Farmiloe Building [1], 34 St
John Street, next to Smithfield Market. This is the 6th most popular film and
TV location in London,[2] having also been used for Spooks, Penelope, and
Batman Begins.[3]

The entrance to the "Ankara Social Club" of the film is actually the front
door of a residential flat. The Broadway Market hair dresser known as
"Broadway Gents Hairstylist" was changed to "Azim's Hair Salon", where in the
film one of the Russians is murdered. The owner Mr. Ismail Yesiloglu decided
to keep most of the shop front after filming. In the original script, the name
was "Ozim's Hair Salon", but it was later changed to "Azim's" as there is no
such name as Ozim in Turkish.

The "Trafalgar Hospital" is actually the Middlesex Hospital, a hospital in the
Fitzrovia area of London, England which was closed to patients in December
2005. The building in central London, which was knocked down in 2008, had the
inscription 'Trafalgar Hospital', matching the style and apparent age of the
old Middlesex Hospital, inserted into the legend above the main door.

### [edit] Tattoos

See also: Criminal tattoo

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mortensen as Nikolai Luzhin

According to the New York Daily News[4], Viggo Mortensen studied Russian
gangsters and their tattoos, and also consulted a documentary on the subject
called The Mark of Cain (2000). The tattoos that he wore were, according to
the New York Daily News, so real that when he went into a Russian restaurant
in London, a Russian couple sitting next to him became very quiet when they
saw the tattoos on his hands, but since Mortensen could not speak ten words of
Russian the mood of the restaurant changed back to normal.[5] From that day on
he washed off his tattoos whenever he went off the set. Mortensen said of the
significance of the tattoos:

> "I talked to them about what they meant and where they were on the body,
what that said about where they'd been, what their specialties were, what
their ethnic and geographical affiliations were," Mortensen says. "Basically
their history, their calling card, is their body."

### [edit] Violence

When asked in an interview about the difference between "gun violence" and
"knife violence", Cronenberg replied, "We have no guns in this movie. There
were no guns in the script. The choice of those curved knives we use in the
steam bath was mine. Theyâre not some kind of exotic Turkish knives,
theyâre linoleum knives. I felt that these guys could walk around in the
streets with these knives, and if they were ever caught, they could say
'weâre linoleum cutters'." [6]

## [edit] Director's commentary

Adam Nayman of Eye Weekly reported that director David Cronenberg said "Just
don't give the plot away" and Nayman wrote "His request is understandable."
Nayman said, "There is one scene â the in-depth discussion of which prompted
the director's anti-spoiler request referenced at the top of this story â
that should rank not only in his personal pantheon of spectacularly deployed
gore but among the most exhilaratingly visceral patches of cinema, period,
full stop."[7] Chicago Sun-Times critic Roger Ebert noted Cronenberg's quote
and agreed, saying "He is correct that it would be fatal, because this is not
a movie of what or how, but of why. And for a long time you don't see the why
coming."[8]

## [edit] Release

The film premiered September 8, 2007 at the Toronto International Film
Festival[9] where it won the Audience Prize for best film on September 15,
2007.[10] Eastern Promises opened in limited release in Russia on September
13, 2007.[9]

In the United States and Canada, the film opened in limited release in 15
theaters on September 14, 2007 and grossed $547,092 â averaging $36,472 per
theater.[11] The film opened in wide release in the United States and Canada
on September 21, 2007 (expanding to 1,404 theaters) and ranked #5 at the box
office, grossing $5,659,133 â an average of $4,030 per theater.[11] The film
has grossed $51,202,291 worldwide as of January 31, 2008 â $17,266,000 in
the United States and Canada and $33,936,291 in other territories.[12]

The film took part in competition at the San Sebastian Film Festival September
20, 2007.

The film was shown at the London Film Festival on October 17, 2007 and was
released in the United Kingdom on October 26, 2007.[9]

## [edit] Reception

The film received positive reviews from critics. As of June 27, 2008, the
review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 88% of critics gave the film
positive reviews, based on 177 reviews.[13] On Metacritic, the film had an
average score of 82/100, based on 35 reviews.[14] Todd McCarthy of Variety,
[15] David Elliott of The San Diego Union-Tribune[16], and film critic Tony
Medley noted the twists in the film.[17]

Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film four stars and wrote
"Eastern Promises is no ordinary crime thriller, just as Cronenberg is no
ordinary director", and said "Cronenberg has moved film by film into the top
rank of directors, and here he wisely reunites with Mortensen" who "digs so
deeply into the role you may not recognize him at first." Ebert said the film
has a fight scene that "sets the same kind of standard that The French
Connection set for chases. Years from now, it will be referred to as a
benchmark." [18]

J. Hoberman of the Village Voice said "I've said it before and hope to again:
David Cronenberg is the most provocative, original, and consistently excellent
North American director of his generation." Hoberman said the film is
"directed with considerable formal intelligence and brooding power" and
continues the trend of "murderous family dramas" seen in Spider and A History
of Violence. Hoberman called the film "graphic but never gratuitous in its
violence", "garish yet restrained", "a masterful mood piece", "deceptively
generic" and said the film "suggests a naturalized version of the recent
Russian horror flick Night Watch." When describing the cast, Hoberman said
"Mueller-Stahl may be perfunctory...but Vincent Cassel literally flings
himself into [his role]" and "Mortensen is even more electrifying as Nikolai
than in A History of Violence"[19]

Chris Vognar of The Dallas Morning News gave the film a "B+" and said "The
film's genius performance belongs to the venerable Armin Mueller-Stahl, who
plays the family head with a twinkling eye and an air of avuncular, Old World
charm." Vognar wrote "Where some may see melodrama, Mr. Cronenberg locates
timeless, elemental struggles between good and evil, right and wrong. But he
makes sure to place a mysterious gray area front and center, personified here
by Mr. Mortensen's Nikolai", writing "Nikolai Luzhin is...like Ray Bradbury's
Illustrated Man...only more dangerous" and "scarily enigmatic." Vognar wrote
that Eastern Promises shares themes of "ambiguous identity and rage-soaked
duality" with A History of Violence and said both films "have a lock-step
precision and both take a sly kind of joy in subverting genre expectations."
Vognar said Eastern Promises "is a little too mechanical for its own
good...but the mechanics also produce an admirable crispness and sense of
purpose, a sense that the man behind the camera knows exactly what he's doing
at all times."[20]

Film Journal International critic Doris Toumarkine said the film is a "highly
entertaining but sometimes revolting look at a particularly venal branch of
the Russian mob." Toumarkine wrote that Mortensen and Watts "are intriguing
moral counterpoints. They are also the key ingredients that make Eastern
Promises a highly delectable and cinematically rich borsht that upscale film
fans will devour." She described Mortensen's performance as "startling,"
called Watts "touching," Cassel "particularly delicious," but said "Mueller-
Stahl, Cusack, and Skolimowski donât have as much to chew on." She said the
film "is also blessed by Howard Shore's restrained score, which lets the
filmâs other estimable elements breathe through." Toumarkine also said the
film is "essentially a character-driven crime thriller but is also a bloody
tour de force laced with considerable nudity and sexually bold content that
will rattle the squeamish."[21]

Bruce Westbrook of the Houston Chronicle gave the film one star out of four
and said it had a "contrived plot" and wrote "what it's really about, more
than sensitivity for displaced people or social analyses, is violence â
hideous, gruesome, over-the-top violence." Westbrook said "For Cronenberg,
such cheap sensationalism is business as usual, and this far into his career,
that business has slipped into artistic bankruptcy." Westbrook wrote the film
"isn't about Russian gangs so much as Cronenberg's own dark passions not just
for violence but excruciating carnage, which he brandishes mercilessly" and
that the film was "a stifling descent into grim shock and disturbing awe."[22]

## [edit] Awards and nominations

Eastern Promises won the Audience Prize for best film on September 15, 2007 at
the Toronto International Film Festival.[10]

The film received 3 Golden Globe nominations for the 65th Golden Globe Awards,
winning none.[23] Eastern Promises was nominated for Best Motion Picture -
Drama. Viggo Mortensen was nominated for Best Performance By An Actor In A
Motion Picture - Drama. And Howard Shore was nominated for Best Original Score
for a Motion Picture.[24]

The film was nominated in five different categories in the British Independent
Film Awards for 2007, and won in one category, gaining a Best Performance by
an Actor in a British Independent Film award for Mortensen.[25]

Mortensen was also nominated for Best Actor at the 80th Academy Awards,[26]
but told the Associated Press, "If there's a strike I will not go." â a
reference to the ongoing Writers Guild of America strike.[27] On February 12,
2008 the strike ended, and he attended the ceremony.

### [edit] Genie Awards

Eastern Promises received 12 nominations for the 28th Genie Awards, tying with
the film Shake Hands with the Devil for most nominations, and won 7.[28][29]

Nominations[30][31]

  * Best Motion Picture

  * Achievement in Art Direction/Production Design (Carol Spier)

  * Achievement in Costume Design (Denise Cronenberg)

  * Achievement in Cinematography (Peter Suschitzky)

  * Achievement in Direction (David Cronenberg)

  * Achievement in Editing (Ronald Sanders)

  * Achievement in Music - Original Score (Howard Shore)

  * Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role (Viggo Mortensen)

  * Performance by an Actor in a Supporting Role (Armin Mueller-Stahl)

  * Achievement in Overall Sound (Stuart Wilson, Christian Cooke, Orest Sushko, Mark Zsifkovits)

  * Achievement in Sound Editing (Wayne Griffin, Robert Bertola, Tony Currie, Andy Malcolm, Michael O'Farrell)

  * Original Screenplay (Steve Knight)

### [edit] Top ten lists

The film appeared on many critics' top ten lists of the best films of
2007.[32]

  * 2nd - J. Hoberman, The Village Voice

  * 4th - Manohla Dargis, The New York Times (tied with Colossal Youth)

  * 4th - Peter Travers, Rolling Stone[33]

  * 4th - Steven Rea, The Philadelphia Inquirer

  * 5th - Frank Scheck, The Hollywood Reporter

  * 7th - Liam Lacey & Rick Groen, The Globe and Mail

  * 7th - Scott Foundas, LA Weekly (tied with Before the Devil Knows You're Dead)

  * 8th - Desson Thomson, The Washington Post

  * 9th - Nathan Lee, The Village Voice

  * 9th - Shawn Levy, The Oregonian

  * 10th - Jack Mathews, New York Daily News

  * 10th - Marjorie Baumgarten, The Austin Chronicle

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Pictures of the Farmiloe Building at Locationworks.com
  2. ^ BA London Eye Tops List of London's Most Popular Film Locations, 21 August 2006.
  3. ^ Film London : Location of the Month June 2005
  4. ^ John Clark (2007-09-09). "Viggo Mortensen digs into naked emotional turf". New York Daily News. http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/movies/2007/09/09/2007-09-09_viggo_mortensen_digs_into_naked_emotiona.html. Retrieved on 2007-26-09.
  5. ^ Nanna Louise Teckemeier (2007-01-18). (Danish) "Viggo is frightening (Original Danish title: Viggo er skrÃ¦mmende)". Ekstra Bladet. http://ekstrabladet.dk/flash/filmogtv/film/article191518.ece (Danish). Retrieved on 2007-26-09.
  6. ^ FOREIGN AFFAIRS: David Cronenberg talks about his strangely intimate new Russian mafia movie Eastern Promises and snuff films on the Internet
  7. ^ Adam Nayman (2007-08-30). "INDELIBLE INK". Eye Weekly. http://www.eyeweekly.com/eye/issue/issue_08.30.07/film/feature.php. Retrieved on 2007-10-22.
  8. ^ Roger Ebert (2007-09-14). ":: rogerebert.com :: Reviews :: Eastern Promises". Chicago Sun-Times. http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20070913/REVIEWS/709130303/1023. Retrieved on 2007-10-22. ""Just don't give the plot away," Cronenberg begged in that interview. He is correct that it would be fatal, because this is not a movie of what or how, but of why. And for a long time you don't see the why coming."
  9. ^ a b c http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0765443/releaseinfo Retrieved 2007-09-15
  10. ^ a b Tamsen Tillson (2007-09-16). "'Promises' wins best film in Toronto". Variety. http://www.variety.com/index.asp?layout=festivals&jump=story&id=1061&articleid=VR1117972045&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-09-17.
  11. ^ a b "Eastern Promises (2007) - Weekend Box Office". Box Office Mojo. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?page=weekend&id=easternpromises.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-26.
  12. ^ "Eastern Promises (2007)". Box Office Mojo. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=easternpromises.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-31.
  13. ^ "Eastern Promises - Rotten Tomatoes". Rotten Tomatoes. http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/eastern_promises/. Retrieved on 2008-06-27.
  14. ^ "Eastern Promises (2007): Reviews". Metacritic. http://www.metacritic.com/film/titles/easternpromises. Retrieved on 2007-12-13.
  15. ^ Todd McCarthy (2007-09-08). "Eastern Promises". Variety. http://www.variety.com/index.asp?layout=festivals&jump=review&reviewid=VE1117934652. Retrieved on 2007-09-14.
  16. ^ David Elliott (2007-09-13). "A history of violence". The San Diego Union-Tribune. http://www.signonsandiego.com/uniontrib/20070913/news_lz1w13promise.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-15.
  17. ^ Tony Medley. "Eastern Promises". tonymedley.com. http://www.tonymedley.com/2007/Eastern_Promises.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-15.
  18. ^ Roger Ebert (2007-09-14). ":: rogerebert.com :: Reviews :: Eastern Promises". Chicago Sun-Times. http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20070913/REVIEWS/709130303. Retrieved on 2007-09-14.
  19. ^ J. Hoberman (2007-09-11). "Still Cronenberg". Village Voice. http://www.villagevoice.com/film/0737,hoberman,77750,20.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-14.
  20. ^ Chris Vognar (2007-09-14). "Eastern Promises". The Dallas Morning News. http://www.guidelive.com/portal/page?_pageid=33,97283&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL&item_id=59808. Retrieved on 2007-09-14.
  21. ^ Doris Toumarkine. "EASTERN PROMISES". Film Journal International. http://www.filmjournal.com/filmjournal/reviews/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1003637583. Retrieved on 2007-09-14.
  22. ^ Bruce Westbrook (2007-09-14). "Hideous, gruesome, over-the-top violence". Houston Chronicle. http://www.chron.com/disp/story.mpl/ent/movies/reviews/5088925.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-14.
  23. ^ "65th Golden Globe Awards Nominations & Winners". goldenglobes.org. http://www.goldenglobes.org/nominations/year/2007. Retrieved on 2008-01-19.
  24. ^ "HOLLYWOOD FOREIGN PRESS ASSOCIATION 2008 GOLDEN GLOBE AWARDS FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2007". goldenglobes.org. 2007-12-13. http://www.goldenglobes.org/news/id/81. Retrieved on 2007-12-13.
  25. ^ "British Independent Film Awards 2007 nominations". British Independent Film Awards. http://www.bifa.org.uk/film/917/Eastern_Promises.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-24.
  26. ^ "80th Academy Awards nominations". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. http://www.oscars.org/80academyawards/nominees/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-22.
  27. ^ Stephen M. Silverman (2008-01-22). "Viggo Mortensen Won't Cross Oscar Picket Line". People. http://www.people.com/people/package/article/0,,20168763_20173013,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-22.
  28. ^ Maria Kubacki (2008-01-29). "Violent mobsters, Alzheimer's and genocide: It's Canadian cinema!". National Post. http://www.nationalpost.com/arts/story.html?id=270335. Retrieved on 2008-01-30.
  29. ^ Etan Vlessing (2008-01-29). ""Promises," "Devil" each nab 12 Genie nominations". Reuters. http://www.reuters.com/article/filmNews/idUSN2952650820080130?sp=true. Retrieved on 2008-01-30.
  30. ^ "Eastern Promises and Shake hands With The Devil Lead in 2008 Genie Award Nominations" (PDF). Academy of Canadian Cinema and Television. 2008-01-28. 4. http://www.genieawards.ca/Genie28/press/GENIE28NomsRelease.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-01-30.
  31. ^ "28th Genie Awards". Academy of Canadian Cinema and Television. http://www.genieawards.ca/Genie28/proglist.cfm?titid=12898. Retrieved on 2008-01-30.
  32. ^ "Metacritic: 2007 Film Critic Top Ten Lists". Metacritic. http://www.metacritic.com/film/awards/2007/toptens.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-01-04.
  33. ^ Travers, Peter, (December 19, 2007) "Peter Travers' Best and Worst Movies of 2007" Rolling Stone. Retrieved 2007-12-20

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Eastern
Promises  
  * Official site
  * Eastern Promises at the Internet Movie Database
  * Eastern Promises at Rotten Tomatoes
  * Eastern Promises at Metacritic
  * Eastern Promises at Box Office Mojo
  * Eastern Promises at Allmovie
  * Eastern Promises movie trailer at Times Online
  * David Cronenberg's Preparation for Directing Eastern Promises, an Amazon reference list

### [edit] Interviews

  * Film Comment interview with David Cronenberg
  * Village Voice interview with Cronenberg
  * GreenCine Daily interviews Cronenberg & Viggo Mortensen
  * Viggo Mortensen interview
  * Rotten Tomatoes Interview with Cronenberg and Mortensen 2007
  * Interview about Eastern Promises for SBIFF at UCSB

v â¢ d â¢ e

Films by David Cronenberg  
1960s

Stereo (1969)  
1970s

Crimes of the Future (1970) Â· Shivers (1975) Â· Rabid (1977) Â· Fast Company
(1979) Â· The Brood (1979)  
1980s

Scanners (1981) Â· Videodrome (1983) Â· The Dead Zone (1983) Â· The Fly (1986)
Â· Dead Ringers (1988)  
1990s

Naked Lunch (1991) Â· M. Butterfly (1993) Â· Crash (1996) Â· eXistenZ (1999)  
2000s

Spider (2002) Â· A History of Violence (2005) Â· Eastern Promises (2007)  
Shorts

Transfer (1966) Â· From the Drain (1967) Â· Camera (2000) Â· To Each His Own
Cinema (2007)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eastern_Promises"

Categories: 2007 films | BBC Films | Films directed by David Cronenberg |
British films | English-language films | Films set in London | Mafia films |
Russian-language films | Ukrainian-language films | Turkish-language films |
American films | 2000s thriller films | Crime thriller films | Gangster films
| Canadian films | Focus Features films

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 13:47.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



