
# Telecine

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Telecine (pronounced /ËtÉlÉËsÉªni/, /ËtÉlÉËsÉªni/, ËtÉlÉËsÉªnÉ/,
also /ËtÉlÉËsiËn/ â "tel-e-Sin-ee"; "tel-e-Sin-a" as 'cine' is the same
root as in 'cinema'; also "tele-seen") is the process of transferring motion
picture film into video form. The term is also used to refer to the equipment
used in the process.

Telecine enables a motion picture, captured originally on film, to be viewed
with standard video equipment, such as televisions, video cassette decks or
computers. This allows producers and distributors working in film to release
their products on video and allows producers to use video production equipment
to complete their film projects. The word âTelecineâ is a combination of
âtelevisionâ and âcinema.â Within the film industry, it is also
referred to as a TK, as TC is already used to designate time code.

## Contents

  * 1 History of telecine
  * 2 Frame rate differences
    * 2.1 2:2 pulldown
    * 2.2 2:3 pulldown
    * 2.3 Other pulldown patterns
    * 2.4 Telecine judder
    * 2.5 Reverse telecine (a.k.a. inverse telecine (IVTC), reverse pulldown)
  * 3 Telecine hardware
    * 3.1 Flying spot scanner
    * 3.2 Line Array CCD
    * 3.3 Pulsed LED/Triggered Three CCD Camera system
    * 3.4 Digital intermediate systems and virtual telecines
    * 3.5 Video cameras that produce telecined video, and "film look"
  * 4 Digital television and high definition
  * 5 DVDs
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] History of telecine

<IMG>

<IMG>

A site with color correction device and Thompson SHADOW Telecine.

With the advent of popular television, broadcasters realized they needed more
than live programming. By turning to film-originated material, they would have
access to the wealth of films made for the cinema in addition to recorded
television programming on film that could be aired at different times.
However, the difference in frame rates between film (generally 24 frame/s) and
television (30 or 25 frame/s) meant that simply playing a film into a
television camera would result in flickering when the film frame was changed
in mid-field of the TV frame.

Originally the kinescope was used to record the image off a television display
to film, synchronized to the TV scan rate. This could then be re-played
directly into a video camera for re-display.[1] Non-live programming could
also be filmed using the same cameras, edited mechanically as normal, and then
played back for TV. As the film was run at the same speed as the television,
the flickering was eliminated. Various displays, including projectors for
these "video rate films", slide projectors and movie cameras were often
combined into a "film chain", allowing the broadcaster to cue up various forms
of media and switch between them by moving a mirror or prism. Color was
supported by using a multi-tube video camera and prisms to separate the
original color signal and feeding the red, green and blue to separate tubes.

However, this still left film shot at cinema rates as a problem. The obvious
solution is to simply speed up the film to match the television frame rates,
but this, at least in the case of NTSC, is rather obvious to the eye and ear.
This problem is not difficult to fix, however; the solution being to
periodically play a selected frame twice. For NTSC, the difference in frame
rates can be corrected by showing every fourth frame of film twice, although
this does require the sound to be handled separately to avoid "skipping"
effects. A more convincing technique is to use "2:3 pulldown", which turns
every other frame of the film into three fields of video, which results in a
much smoother display. PAL uses a similar system, "2:2 pulldown". These
projectors could be included into existing film chain systems, allowing
cinematic films to be played directly to television. With the introduction of
videotape into television processing in the 1950s, it became practical to
record telecined movies to videotape for later playback. This eliminated the
need for the special projectors and cameras in the broadcast studio.

Since that time, telecine has primarily been a film-to-videotape process, as
opposed to film-to-air. Changes since the 1950s have primarily been in terms
of equipment and physical formats, the basic concept remains the same. Home
videotapes of movies used this technique, and it is not uncommon to find
telecined DVDs when the source was originally recorded to videotape. The same
is not true for modern DVDs of cinematic movies, which are generally recorded
in their original frame rate â in these cases the DVD player itself applies
telecining as required to match the capabilities of the television.

## [edit] Frame rate differences

Main article: Frame rate

The most complex part of telecine is the synchronization of the mechanical
film motion and the electronic video signal. Every time the video part of the
telecine samples the light electronically, the film part of the telecine must
have a frame in perfect registration and ready to photograph. This is
relatively easy when the film is photographed at the same frame rate as the
video camera will sample, but when this is not true, a sophisticated procedure
is required to change frame rate.

To avoid the synchronisation issues, higher end establishments now use a
scanning system rather than just a telecine system. This allows them to scan a
distinct frame of digital video for each frame of film, providing higher
quality than a telecine system would be able to achieve. Normally, best
results are then achieved by using a smoothing (interpolating algorithm)
rather than a frame duplication algorithm (such as 3:2 pulldown, etc) to
adjust for speed differences between the film and video frame rate.

### [edit] 2:2 pulldown

In countries that use the PAL or SECAM video standards, film destined for
television is photographed at 25 frames per second. The PAL video standard
broadcasts at 25 frames per second, so the transfer from film to video is
simple; for every film frame, one video frame is captured.

    Image:2-2pulldown.svg
Theatrical features originally photographed at 24 frame/s are simply sped up
by 4% to 25 frame/s. While this is usually not noticed in the picture it
causes a slightly noticeable increase in audio pitch by about one semitone,
which is sometimes corrected using a pitch shifter, though pitch shifting is a
recent innovation and supersedes an alternative method of telecine for 25
frame/s formats. However, a difference between the two is rarely noticed
unless the original audio is compared side by side with the pitched audio.

2:2 pulldown is also used to transfer shows and movies, photographed at 30
frames per second, like "Friends" and "Oklahoma!",[2] to NTSC video, which has
60 Hz scanning rate.

Although the 4% speed increase has been standard since the early days of PAL
and SECAM television, recently a new technique has gained popularity, and the
resulting speed and pitch of the telecined presentation are identical to that
of the original film.

This pulldown method[3] is sometimes used in order to convert 24 frame/s
material to 25 frame/s. Usually, this involves a film to PAL transfer without
the aforementioned 4% speedup. For film at 24 frame/s, there are 24 frames of
film for every 25 frames of PAL video. In order to accommodate this mismatch
in frame rate, 24 frames of film have to be distributed over 50 PAL fields.
This can be accomplished by inserting a pulldown field every 12 frames, thus
effectively spreading 12 frames of film over 25 fields (or â12.5 framesâ)
of PAL video. The method used is 2:2:2:2:2:2:2:2:2:2:2:3 (Euro) pulldown (see
below).

This method was born out of a frustration with the faster, higher pitched
soundtracks that traditionally accompanied films transferred for PAL and SECAM
audiences. More motion pictures are beginning to be telecined this
way[citation needed]. It is particularly suited for films where the soundtrack
is of special importance.

### [edit] 2:3 pulldown

In the United States and other countries with television using 60Hz vertical
scanning frequency, video is broadcast at 29.97 frame/s. For the film's motion
to be accurately rendered on the video signal, a telecine must use a technique
called the 2:3 pulldown (sometimes also called 3:2 pulldown) to convert from
24 to 29.97 frame/s.

The term âpulldownâ comes from the mechanical process of âpullingâ the
film down to advance it from one frame to the next at a repetitive rate
(nominally 24 frame/s). This is accomplished in two steps. The first step is
to slow down the film motion by 1/1000. This speed change is unnoticeable to
the viewer, and makes the film travel at 23.976 frame/s (or 7.2 seconds longer
in a 2-hour movie).

The second step of the 2:3 pulldown is distributing cinema frames into video
fields. At 23.976 frame/s, there are four frames of film for every five frames
of 60Hz video:

     \\frac{23.976}{29.97} = \\frac{4}{5}
These four frames are âstretchedâ into five by exploiting the interlaced
nature of 60Hz video. For every frame, there are actually two incomplete
images or fields, one for the odd-numbered lines of the image, and one for the
even-numbered lines. There are, therefore, eight fields for every four film
frames, and the telecine alternately places one film frame across two fields,
the next across three, the next across two, and so on. The cycle repeats
itself completely after four film frames have been exposed, and in the
telecine cycle these are called the A, B, C, and D frames, thus:

    Image:32pulldown.svg
A 3:2 pattern is identical to this except that it is shifted by one frame. For
instance, starting with film frame B, followed by frame C, yields a 3:2
pattern (B-B-B-C-C). In other words, there is no difference between the two
â it is only a matter of reference. In fact, the "3:2 pulldown" notation is
misleading because according to SMPTE standards the first frame of every four-
frame film sequence (the A-frame) is associated with the first and second
fields of one video frame, and is scanned twice, not three times.[4]

The above method is a "classic" 2:3, which was used before frame buffers
allowed for holding more than one frame. The preferred method for doing a 2:3
creates only one dirty frame in every five (i.e. 3:3:2:2 or 2:3:3:2 or
2:2:3:3); while this method has a slight bit more judder, it allows for easier
upconversion (the dirty frame can be dropped without losing information) and a
better overall compression when encoding. The 2:3:3:2 pattern is supported by
the Panasonic DVX-100B video camera under the name "Advanced Pulldown".

### [edit] Other pulldown patterns

Similar techniques must be used for films shot at âsilent speedsâ of less
than 24 frame/s (about 18frame/s), which include most silent movies themselves
as well as many home movies. Sixteen frame/s (actually 15.985) to NTSC 30
frame/s (actually 29.97), pulldown should be 3:4:4:4; 16 frame/s to PAL,
pulldown should be 3:3:3:3:3:3:3:4; 18 frame/s (actually 17.982) to NTSC,
pulldown should be 3:3:4; 20 frame/s (actually 19.980) to NTSC, pulldown
should be 3:3.

### [edit] Telecine judder

See also: Motion interpolation

The â2:3 pulldownâ telecine process creates a slight error in the video
signal compared to the original film frames that can be seen in the above
image. This is one reason why films viewed on typical NTSC home equipment may
not appear as smooth as when viewed in a cinema. The phenomenon is
particularly apparent during slow, steady camera movements which appear
slightly jerky when telecined. This process is commonly referred to as
telecine judder. Reversing the 2-3 pulldown telecine is discussed below.

PAL material in which 2:2:2:2:2:2:2:2:2:2:2:3 pulldown has been applied,
suffers from a similar lack of smoothness, though this effect is not usually
called âtelecine judderâ. Effectively, every 12th film frame is displayed
for the duration of three PAL fields (60 milliseconds), whereas the other 11
frames are all displayed for the duration of two PAL fields (40 milliseconds).
This causes a slight âhiccupâ in the video about twice a second.
Increasingly being referred to as Euro pulldown as it largely affects European
territories.

### [edit] Reverse telecine (a.k.a. inverse telecine (IVTC), reverse pulldown)

Some DVD players, line doublers, and personal video recorders are designed to
detect and remove 2-3 pulldown from interlaced video sources, thereby
reconstructing the original 24 frame/s film frames. This technique is known as
âreverseâ or âinverseâ telecine. Benefits of reverse telecine include
high-quality non-interlaced display on compatible display devices and the
elimination of redundant data for compression purposes.

Reverse telecine is crucial when acquiring film material into a digital non-
linear editing system such as Sony Vegas Pro, Avid or Final Cut Pro, since
these machines produce negative cut lists which refer to specific frames in
the original film material. When video from a telecine is ingested into these
systems, the operator usually has available a âtelecine trace,â in the
form of a text file, which gives the correspondence between the video material
and film original. Alternatively, the video transfer may include telecine
sequence markers âburned inâ to the video image along with other
identifying information such as time code.

It is also possible, but more difficult, to perform reverse telecine without
prior knowledge of where each field of video lies in the 2-3 pulldown pattern.
This is the task faced by most consumer equipment such as line doublers and
personal video recorders. Ideally, only a single field needs to be identified,
the rest following the pattern in lock-step. However, the 2-3 pulldown pattern
does not necessarily remain consistent throughout an entire program. Edits
performed on film material after it undergoes 2-3 pulldown can introduce
âjumpsâ in the pattern if care is not taken to preserve the original frame
sequence (this often happens during the editing of television shows and
commercials in NTSC format). Most reverse telecine algorithms attempt to
follow the 2-3 pattern using image analysis techniques, e.g. by searching for
repeated fields.

Algorithms that perform 2-3 pulldown removal also usually perform the task of
deinterlacing. It is possible to algorithmically determine whether video
contains a 2-3 pulldown pattern or not, and selectively do either reverse
telecine (in the case of film-sourced video) or deinterlacing (in the case of
native video sources).

## [edit] Telecine hardware

### [edit] Flying spot scanner

<IMG>

<IMG>

The parts of a flying spot scanner: (A) Cathode-ray tube (CRT); (B) photon
beam; (C) & (D) dichroic mirrors; (E), (F) & (G) red-, green- and blue-
sensitive photomultipliers.

In the United Kingdom, Rank Precision Industries was experimenting with the
flying-spot scanner (FSS), which inverted the cathode ray tube (CRT) concept
of scanning using a television screen. The CRT emits a pixel-sized electron
beam which is converted to a photon beam through the phosphors coating the
envelope. This dot of light is then focused by a lens onto the film's
emulsion, and finally collected by a pickup device. In 1950 the first Rank
flying spot monochrome telecine was installed at the BBC's Lime Grove
Studios.[5] The advantage of the FSS is that colour analysis is done after
scanning, so there can be no registration errors as can be produced by vidicon
tubes where scanning is done after colour separation â it also allows
simpler dichroics to be used.

In a flying spot scanner (FSS) or cathode-ray tube (CRT) telecine, a pixel-
sized light beam is projected through exposed and developed motion picture
film (either negative or positive) at a phosphor-coated envelope. This beam of
light âscansâ across the film image from left to right to record the
vertical frame information. Horizontal scanning of the frame was then
accomplished by moving the film past the CRT beam. This beam passes through
the film image, projecting it pixel-by-pixel onto the pickup (phosphor-coated
envelope). The light from the CRT passes through the film and is separated by
dichroic mirrors and filters into red, green and blue bands. Photomultiplier
tubes or avalanche photodiodes convert the light into separate red, green and
blue electrical signals for further electronic processing. This can be
accomplished in âreal timeâ, 24 frames a second (or in some cases faster).
Rank Precision-Cintel introduced the âMarkâ series of FSS telecines.
During this time advances were also made in CRTs, with increased light output
producing a better signal-to-noise ratio and so allowing negative film to be
used.

The problem with flying-spot scanners was the difference in frequencies
between television field rates and film frame rates. This was solved first by
the Mk. I Polygonal Prism system, which was optically sychronised to the
television frame rate by the rotating prism and could be run at any frame
rate. This was replaced by the Mk. II Twin Lens, and then around 1975, by the
Mk. III Hopping Patch (jump scan). The Mk. III series progressed from the
original âjump scanâ interlace scan to the Mk. IIIB which used a
progressive scan and included a digital scan converter (Digiscan) to output
interlaced video. The Mk. IIIC was the most popular of the series and used a
next generation Digiscan plus other improvements.

The "Mark" series was then replaced by the Ursa (1989), the first in their
line of telecines capable of producing digital data in 4:2:2 color space. The
Ursa Gold (1993) stepped this up to 4:4:4 and then the Ursa Diamond (1997),
which incorporated many third-party improvements on the Ursa system.[6]
Cintel's C-Reality and ITK's Millennium flying-spot scanner are able to do
both HD and Data.

### [edit] Line Array CCD

<IMG>

<IMG>

The parts of a CCD scanner: (A) Xenon bulb; (B) film plane; (C) & (D) prisms
and/or dichroic mirrors; (E) ,(F) & (G) red-, green- and blue-sensitive CCDs.

The Robert Bosch GmbH, Fernseh Div., which later became BTS inc. \- Philips
Digital Video Systems and is now part of Thomson's Grass Valley, introduced
the world's first CCD telecine (1979), the FDL-60. The FDL-60 designed and
made in Darmstadt West Germany, was the first all solid state Telecine.

Rank Cintel (ADS telecine 1982) and Marconi Company (1985) both made CCD
Telecines for a short time. The Marconi B3410 sold 84 units over a three year
period, and a former Marconi technician still maintains them.

In a charge-coupled device Line Array CCD telecine, a âwhiteâ light is
shone through the exposed film image into a prism, which separates out the
image into the three primary colors, red, green and blue. Each beam of colored
light is then projected at a different CCD, one for each color. The CCD
converts the light into electrical impulses which the telecine electronics
modulate into a video signal which can then be recorded onto video tape or
broadcast.

Philips-BTS eventually evolved the FDL 60 into the FDL 90 (1989)/ Quadra
(1993). In 1996 Philips, working with Kodak, introduced the Spirit DataCine
(SDC 2000), which was capable of scanning the film image at HDTV resolutions
and approaching 2K (1920 Luminance and 960 Chrominace RGB) x 1556 RGB. With
the data option the Spirit DataCine can be used as a motion picture film
scanner outputting 2K DPX data files as 2048 x 1556 RGB. In 2000 Philips
introduced the Shadow Telecine (STE), a low cost version of the Spirit with no
Kodak parts. The Spirit DataCine, Cintel's C-Reality and ITK's Millennium
opened the door to the technology of digital intermediates, wherein telecine
tools were not just used for video outputs, but could now be used for high-
resolution data that would later be recorded back out to film.[6] The Grass
Valley Spirit 4k\2k\HD (2004) replaced the Spirit 1 Datacine and uses both 2K
and 4k line array CCDs. (Note: the SDC-2000 did not use a color prisms and/or
dichroic mirrors.)

### [edit] Pulsed LED/Triggered Three CCD Camera system

In 2004, MWA Nova, Berlin introduced flashscan a new concept in film transfer
systems.

Using continuous film motion, an array of multiple red, green and blue LEDs is
pulsed at just the moment a frame of film is precisely positioned in front of
the optics of a high-resolution, three-CCD, triggerable industrial process
control camera. The LED array pulse triggers the camera and sends the single,
non-interlaced image of the film frame to a digital frame store, where the
electronic picture is clocked out at the applicable TV frame rate for PAL (or
NTSC.) This approach enables the film speed to be variedâwithout
flickerâin real time from three to twenty-five Frames Per Second (PAL) or
six to thirty FPS for NTSC units, while introducing the appropriate pull-down
for the television system involved. The output can be progressive (non-
interlaced) or interlaced. The framestore also provides multiple digital and
analog outputs.

The Pulsed LED/Triggered camera concept was extended to 16mm and 35mm in the
company's flashtransfer system for 16 and 35mm film. A camera with larger CCD
chips is used, and the company's well regarded servo driven MB51 magnetic film
transport is the film handling platform. On both platforms, the color of the
LED array can be varied to achieve accurate color balance, which can be
further fine-tuned using the camera's black, white and gamma controls. "De-
pinking" faded film and transfer of color negative film can be handled using
the two color-correction systems. The SDI output enables high-end devices like
digital noise reduction systems and DaVinci style color correctors to be
connected.

The company introduced flashscan HD a high definition version of the
8mm/Super8 product at IBC 2008. The new unit can transfer film in HD at faster
than real-time speeds. It uses a three-CMOS chip HD camera and hardware
processing of the video to output all major HD formats. Software controls film
motion and color correction, which can be tied to cues for real-time color
correction.

### [edit] Digital intermediate systems and virtual telecines

Telecine technology is increasingly merging with that of motion picture film
scanners; high-resolution telecines, such as those mentioned above, can be
regarded as film scanners that operate in real time.

As digital intermediate post-production becomes more common, the need to
combine the traditional telecine functions of input devices, standards
converters, and colour grading systems is becoming less important as the post-
production chain changes to tapeless and filmless operation.

However, the parts of the workflow associated with telecines still remain, and
are being pushed to the end, rather than the beginning, of the post-production
chain, in the form of real-time digital grading systems and digital
intermediate mastering systems, increasingly running in software on commodity
computer systems. These are sometimes called virtual telecine systems.

### [edit] Video cameras that produce telecined video, and "film look"

Some video cameras and consumer camcorders are able to record in progressive
"24 frame/s" (actually 23.98 frame/s) or "30 frame/s" (actually 29.97 frame/s)
in NTSC, or 25 frame/s (PAL) mode. Such a video has cinema-like motion
characteristics and is the major component of so-called "film look" or "movie
look".

For most "24 frame/s" cameras, the virtual 2:3 pulldown process is happening
inside the camera. Although the camera is capturing a progressive frame at the
CCD, just like a movie camera, it is then imposing an interlacing on the image
to record it to tape so that it can be played back on any standard television.
Not every camera handles "24 frame/s" this way, but the majority of them
do.[7]

Cameras that record 25 frame/s (PAL) or 29.97 frame/s (NTSC) do not need to
employ 2:3 pulldown, because every progressive frame occupies exactly two
video fields. In video industry this type of encoding is called Progressive
Segmented Frame (PsF). PsF is conceptually identical to 2:2 pulldown, only
there is no film original to transfer from.

## [edit] Digital television and high definition

Digital television and high definition standards provide several methods for
encoding film material. Fifty field/s formats such as 576i50 and 1080i50 can
accommodate film content using a 4% speed-up like PAL. 59.94 field/s
interlaced formats such as 480i60 and 1080i60 use the same 2:3 pulldown
technique as NTSC. In 59.94 frame/s progressive formats such as 480p60 and
720p60, entire frames (rather than fields) are repeated in a 2:3 pattern,
accomplishing the frame rate conversion without interlacing and its associated
artifacts. Other formats such as 1080p24 can decode film material at its
native rate of 24 or 23.976 frame/s.

All of these coding methods are in use to some extent. In PAL countries, 25
frame/s formats remain the norm. In NTSC countries, most digital broadcasts of
24 frame/s material, both standard and high definition, continue to use
interlaced formats with 2:3 pulldown. Native 24 and 23.976 frame/s formats
offer the greatest image quality and coding efficiency, and are widely used in
motion picture and high definition video production. However, most consumer
video devices do not support these formats. Recently however, several vendors
have begun selling LCD televisions in NTSC/ATSC countries that are capable of
120Hz refresh rates and plasma sets capable of 48, 72, or 96Hz refresh.[8]
When combined with a 1080p24-capable source (such as most Blu-ray players),
some of these sets are able to display film-based content using a pulldown
scheme using whole multiples of 24, thereby avoiding the problems associated
with 2:3 pulldown or the 4% speed-up used in PAL countries.

## [edit] DVDs

On DVDs, telecined material may be either hard telecined, or soft telecined.
In the hard-telecined case, video is stored on the DVD at the playback
framerate (29.97 frame/s for NTSC, 25 frame/s for PAL), using the telecined
frames as shown above. In the soft-telecined case, the material is stored on
the DVD at the film rate (24 or 23.976 frame/s) in the original progressive
format, with special flags inserted into the MPEG-2 video stream that instruct
the DVD player to repeat certain fields so as to accomplish the required
pulldown during playback.[9] Progressive scan DVD players additionally offer
output at 480p by using these flags to duplicate frames rather than fields.

NTSC DVDs are often soft telecined, although lower-quality hard-telecined DVDs
exist. In the case of PAL DVDs using 2:2 pulldown, the difference between soft
and hard telecine vanishes, and the two may be regarded as equal. In the case
of PAL DVDs using 2:3 pulldown, either soft or hard telecining may be applied.

## [edit] See also

  * Factors causing HDTV Blur.
  * Telecine (piracy), a pirated copy of a film created with a telecine.
  * Da Vinci Systems and Pandora Int.'s color grading and editing systems.
  * Cintel telecine equipment.
  * Color suite
  * For means of putting video on film, see telerecording (UK) and kinescope (US).

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Pincus, Edward and Ascher, Steven. (1984). The Filmmaker's Handbook. Plume. p. 368-9 ISBN 0-452-25526-0
  2. ^ "Home Theater and High Fidelity, Progressive Scan DVDs and deinterlacing"". http://www.hometheaterhifi.com/volume_7_4/dvd-benchmark-part-5-progressive-10-2000.html.
  3. ^ MPlayer FAQ
  4. ^ "Charles Poynton, Digital Video and HDTV: Algorithms and Interfaces". http://books.google.com/books?id=ra1lcAwgvq4C&pg=RA1-PA604&vq=illumination&dq=poynton&source=gbs_search_s&sig=xbuHZkXUegarB-2bHG52BNvZVdQ#PRA1-PA610,M1.
  5. ^ Some key dates in Cintel's history
  6. ^ a b Holben, Jay (May 1999). âFrom Film to Tapeâ American Cinematographer Magazine, pp. 108â122.
  7. ^ "Jay Holben, More Detail on 24p". http://www.dv.com/columns/columns_item.php?articleId=196603515.
  8. ^ List of displays that support pulldown at multiples of the original frame rate
  9. ^ DVDFILE.COM: What The Heck Is 3:2 Pulldown?

## [edit] External links

  * XYHD: How a 3:2 Pull Down Cadence works when converting Film to Video
  * Photographs of cine film types and reels. Further information on telecine transfer
  * TMTV: Technical information on HDDTT film transfers
  * IVTC Explained (brief)
  * Explanation of telecine methods
  * EBU I42 2004: Telecines for broadcasters â Technical information
  * The Big Picture â 3:2 Pulldown and Inverse Telecine â In-depth explanation of interlaced and progressive frames, and the telecine process
  * Tutorial Regarding Methods of Inverse Telecining
  * TIG: The Telecine Internet Group (mailinglist and wiki)
  * A Memories3 Technology \- A frame by frame process with a custom engineered telecine machine
  * Frame rate test video files

Hardware Products:

  * Cintel \- Manufacturer of CRT and CCD based telecines and scanners
  * Moviestuff \- Manufacturer of 16 mm and 8 mm film telecine units for home transfers.
  * MWA Nova \- Manufacturer of SD and HD telecines
  * flashscan8.us -US/Canadian Distributor of MWA SD and HD telecines and other products
  * Lasergraphics \- Film scanner manufacturer
  * Digital Film Technology \- Manufacturer of CCD based telecines and data scanners, formerly ThomsonGrassValley, previously Philips, BTS, Bosch
  * Building a Telecine Machine

v â¢ d â¢ e

Video processing  
Post-processing

Deblocking Â· Resizing Â· Deinterlacing Â· Denoising Â· Deflicking  
Special processing

Film colorization (tinting) Â· Color grading Â· Filmizing Â· Super-resolution  
24 to 30 fps conversion

Telecine ( 3:2 pulldown)  
30 to 24 fps conversion

Inverse telecine  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telecine"

Categories: Film and video technology

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since June 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 13:38 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



