
# Martin Scorsese

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Scorsese" redirects here. For other uses, see Scorsese (disambiguation).

For the song by King Missile, see Martin Scorsese (song).

Martin Scorsese  
<IMG>  
Scorsese at the Tribeca Film Festival, 2007  
Born Martin Marcantonio Luciano Scorsese  
November 17, 1942 (1942-11-17) (age 66)  
New York, New York,  
United States  
Occupation film director, producer, screenwriter  
Years active 1963âpresent  
Spouse(s) Laraine Brennan (1965â1971)  
Julia Cameron (1975â1977)  
Isabella Rossellini (1979â1983)  
Barbara De Fina (1985â1991)  
Helen Morris (1999âpresent)  
Martin Marcantonio Luciano Scorsese (born November 17, 1942) is an Academy
Award-winning American filmmaker, screenwriter, producer, and film historian.
Also affectionately known as "Marty", he is the founder of the World Cinema
Foundation and a recipient of the AFI Life Achievement Award for his
contributions to the cinema and has won awards from the Golden Globe, BAFTA,
and Directors Guild of America. Scorsese is president of the Film Foundation,
a non-profit organization dedicated to film preservation and the prevention of
the decaying of motion picture film stock.

Scorsese's body of work addresses such themes as Italian American identity,
Roman Catholic concepts of guilt and redemption,[1] machismo, and violence.
Scorsese is widely considered to be one of the most significant and
influential American filmmakers of his era, directing landmark films such as
Taxi Driver, Raging Bull and Goodfellas; all of which he collaborated on with
actor Robert De Niro. [2] He won the Academy Award for Best Director for The
Departed and earned an MFA in film directing from the New York University
Tisch School of the Arts.

## Contents

  * 1 Life
  * 2 Career
    * 2.1 Early career
    * 2.2 1970s
      * 2.2.1 Mean Streets
      * 2.2.2 Taxi Driver
      * 2.2.3 New York, New York and The Last Waltz
    * 2.3 1980s
      * 2.3.1 Raging Bull
      * 2.3.2 The King of Comedy
      * 2.3.3 After Hours
      * 2.3.4 The Color of Money
      * 2.3.5 The Last Temptation of Christ
    * 2.4 1990s
      * 2.4.1 Goodfellas
      * 2.4.2 Cape Fear
      * 2.4.3 The Age of Innocence
      * 2.4.4 Casino
      * 2.4.5 A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies
      * 2.4.6 Kundun
      * 2.4.7 Bringing Out the Dead
    * 2.5 2000s
      * 2.5.1 Gangs of New York
      * 2.5.2 The Aviator
      * 2.5.3 No Direction Home
      * 2.5.4 The Departed
      * 2.5.5 Shine a Light
      * 2.5.6 Shutter Island
    * 2.6 Future films
  * 3 Pop cultural influence
  * 4 Director trademarks
  * 5 Scorsese's Circle
  * 6 TV Venture
  * 7 Awards and Recognitions
  * 8 Filmography (as director)
  * 9 Selected filmography (as actor)
  * 10 See also
  * 11 References
  * 12 External links

  
## [edit] Life

Martin Scorsese was born in New York City. His father, Luciano Charles
Scorsese (1913â1993), and mother, Catherine Scorsese (nÃ©e Cappa;
1912â1997), both worked in New York's Garment District, his father as a
clothes presser and his mother as a seamstress.[3] As a boy his parents would
often take him to the movie theaters; it was at this stage in his life that he
developed his passion for cinema. Obsessed with historical epics at an early
age, at least two films of the genre, "Land of the Pharaohs"(1955), and "El
Cid"(1961), appear to have had a deep and lasting impact on his cinema psyche.
Scorsese also developed an admiration for neo-realist cinema at this time. He
recounted its influence in a documentary on Italian neorealism, and commented
on how The Bicycle Thief alongside PaisÃ , Rome, Open City inspired him and
how this influenced his view or portrayal of his Sicilian heritage. In his
documentary, Il Mio Viaggio in Italia, Scorsese noted that the Sicilian
episode of Roberto Rossellini's PaisÃ  which he first saw on television
alongside his relatives, who were themselves Sicilian immigrants, made a
significant impact on his life.[4] He has also cited the Indian neorealist
filmmaker Satyajit Ray as an influence on his work.[5] His initial desire to
become a priest was forsaken for cinema â the seminary traded for NYU Film
School, where he received his MFA in film directing in 1969.

Scorsese has been married to Helen Morris since 1999; she is his fifth wife.
They have a daughter, Francesca, who appeared in The Departed and The Aviator.
He has a daughter, Cathy (Catherine), from his first marriage to Laraine
Brennan, and a daughter, Domenica Cameron-Scorsese, who is an actress, from
his second marriage to Julia Cameron. Scorsese was also married to actress
Isabella Rossellini from 1979 to their divorce in 1983. He married producer
Barbara De Fina in 1985; their marriage ended in divorce as well. He is
primarily based in New York City.

## [edit] Career

### [edit] Early career

Although the Vietnam War had started at the time, Scorsese (who had struggled
with asthma since his childhood[6]) did not serve in the military. He attended
New York University's film school (B.A., English, 1964; M.F.A., film, 1966[7])
making the short films What's a Nice Girl Like You Doing in a Place Like This?
(1963) and It's Not Just You, Murray! (1964). His most famous short of the
period is the darkly comic The Big Shave (1967), which featured an unnamed man
who shaves himself until profusely bleeding, ultimately slitting his own
throat with his razor. The film is an indictment of America's involvement in
Vietnam, suggested by its alternative title Viet '67.[8]

Also in 1967, Scorsese made his first feature-length film, the black and white
I Call First, which was later retitled Who's That Knocking at My Door with
fellow student, actor Harvey Keitel, and editor Thelma Schoonmaker both of
whom were to become long-term collaborators. This film was intended to be the
first of Scorsese's semi-autobiographical 'J.R. Trilogy', which also would
have included his later film, Mean Streets. Even in embryonic form, the
"Scorsese style" was already evident: a feel for New York Italian American
street-life, rapid editing, an eclectic rock soundtrack, and a troubled male
protagonist.

### [edit] 1970s

From there he became a friend and acquaintance of the so-called "movie brats"
of the 1970s: Francis Ford Coppola, Brian De Palma, George Lucas, and Steven
Spielberg. It was De Palma who introduced actor Robert De Niro to Scorsese,
and the two figures became close friends, working together on many projects.
During this period the director worked as one of the editors on the movie
Woodstock and met actor-director John Cassavetes, who would also go on to
become a close friend and mentor.[9]

#### [edit] Mean Streets

Main article: Mean Streets

In 1972 Scorsese made the Depression-era gangster film Boxcar Bertha for
B-movie producer Roger Corman, who had also helped directors such as Francis
Ford Coppola, James Cameron, and John Sayles launch their careers. While it is
widely considered a minor work, Boxcar Bertha nonetheless taught Scorsese how
to make films cheaply and quickly, preparing him for his first film with De
Niro, Mean Streets. Following the film's release, Cassavetes encouraged
Scorsese to make the films that he wanted to make, rather than someone else's
projects.

Championed by influential movie critic Pauline Kael, Mean Streets was a
breakthrough for Scorsese, De Niro, and Keitel. By now the signature Scorsese
style was in place: macho posturing, bloody violence, Catholic guilt and
redemption, gritty New York locale (though the majority of Mean Streets was
actually shot in Los Angeles), rapid-fire editing, and a rock soundtrack.
Although the film was innovative, its wired atmosphere, edgy documentary
style, and gritty street-level direction owed a debt to directors Cassavetes,
Samuel Fuller, and early Jean-Luc Godard.[10] (Indeed the film was completed
with much encouragement from Cassavetes, who felt Boxcar Bertha was
undeserving of the young director's prodigious talent.)[9]

In 1974, actress Ellen Burstyn chose Scorsese to direct her in Alice Doesn't
Live Here Anymore, for which she won an Academy Award for Best Actress.
Although well regarded, the film remains an anomaly in the director's early
career, as it focuses on a central female character. Returning to Little Italy
to explore his ethnic roots, Scorsese next came up with Italianamerican, a
documentary featuring his parents, Charles and Catherine Scorsese.

#### [edit] Taxi Driver

Main article: Taxi Driver

Two years later, in 1976, Scorsese sent shock waves through the cinema world
when he directed the iconic Taxi Driver, an unrelentingly grim and violent
portrayal of one man's slow descent into insanity in a hellishly conceived
Manhattan.

Scorsese's direction by now was highly accomplished, using jump cuts,
expressionist lighting,[11] point of view shots and slow motion to reflect the
protagonist's heightened psychological awareness. However Taxi Driver's
immense power was due in part to Robert De Niro's intense lead performance.
The film co-starred Jodie Foster in a highly controversial role as an underage
prostitute, and Harvey Keitel as her pimp, Matthew a.k.a. "Sport."

Taxi Driver also marked the start of a series of collaborations with writer
Paul Schrader. The film bears strong thematic links to (and makes several
allusions to) the work of French director Robert Bresson, most explicitly
Pickpocket (in essence the "diary" of a loner/obsessive who finds redemption).
Writer/director Schrader often returns to Bresson's work in films such as
American Gigolo, Light Sleeper, and Scorsese's later Bringing Out the
Dead.[12]

Already controversial upon its release, Taxi Driver hit the headlines again
five years later, when John Hinckley, Jr., made an assassination attempt on
then-President Ronald Reagan. He subsequently blamed his act on his obsession
with Jodie Foster's Taxi Driver character (in the film, De Niro's character,
Travis Bickle, makes an assassination attempt on a senator).[13]

Taxi Driver won the Palme d'Or at the 1976 Cannes film festival,[14] also
receiving four Oscar nominations, including Best Picture, although all were
unsuccessful.

Scorsese was subsequently offered the role of Charles Manson in the movie
Helter Skelter and a part in Sam Fuller's war movie The Big Red One, but he
turned both down. However he did accept the role of a gangster in exploitation
movie Cannonball directed by Paul Bartel. In this period there were also
several directorial projects that never got off the ground including Haunted
Summer, about Mary Shelley and a film with Marlon Brando about the Indian
massacre at Wounded Knee.

#### [edit] New York, New York and The Last Waltz

Main articles: New York, New York (film) and The Last Waltz

The critical success of Taxi Driver encouraged Scorsese to move ahead with his
first big-budget project: the highly stylized musical New York, New York. This
tribute to Scorsese's home town and the classic Hollywood musical was a box-
office failure.

New York, New York was the director's third collaboration with Robert De Niro,
co-starring with Liza Minnelli (a tribute and allusion to her father,
legendary musical director Vincente Minnelli). The film is best remembered
today for the title theme song, which was popularized by Frank Sinatra.
Although possessing Scorsese's usual visual panache and stylistic bravura,
many critics felt its enclosed studio-bound atmosphere left it leaden in
comparison to his earlier work. Often overlooked, it remains one of the
director's early key studies in male paranoia and insecurity (and hence is in
direct thematic lineage with Mean Streets, Taxi Driver, as well as the later
Raging Bull and The Departed).

The disappointing reception New York, New York received drove Scorsese into
depression. By this stage the director had also developed a serious cocaine
addiction. However, he did find the creative drive to make the highly regarded
The Last Waltz, documenting the final concert by The Band. It was held at the
Winterland Ballroom in San Francisco, and featured one of the most extensive
lineups of prominent guest performers at a single concert, including Eric
Clapton, Neil Young, Neil Diamond, Ringo Starr, Muddy Waters, Joni Mitchell,
Bob Dylan, Paul Butterfield, Ronnie Wood and Van Morrison. However, Scorsese's
commitments to other projects delayed the release of the film until 1978.

Another Scorsese-directed documentary entitled American Boy also appeared in
1978, focusing on Steven Prince, the cocky gun salesman who appeared in Taxi
Driver. A period of wild partying followed, damaging the director's already
fragile health.

### [edit] 1980s

#### [edit] Raging Bull

Main article: Raging Bull

By several accounts (Scorsese's included), Robert De Niro practically saved
Scorsese's life when he persuaded Scorsese to kick his cocaine addiction to
make what many consider his greatest film, Raging Bull. Convinced that he
would never make another movie, he poured his energies into making this
violent biopic of middleweight boxing champion Jake La Motta, calling it a
Kamikaze method of film-making.[15] The film is widely viewed as a masterpiece
and was voted the greatest film of the 1980s by Britain's Sight & Sound
magazine.[16][17] It received eight Oscar nominations, including Best Picture,
Best Actor for Robert De Niro, and Scorsese's first for Best Director. De Niro
won, as did Thelma Schoonmaker for editing, but best director went to Robert
Redford for Ordinary People.

Raging Bull, filmed in high contrast black and white, is where the director's
style reached its zenith: Taxi Driver and New York, New York had used elements
of expressionism to replicate psychological points of view, but here the style
was taken to new extremes, employing extensive slow-motion, complex tracking
shots, and extravagant distortion of perspective (for example, the size of
boxing rings would change from fight to fight).[18] Thematically too, the
concerns carried on from Mean Streets and Taxi Driver: insecure males,
violence, guilt, and redemption.

Although the screenplay for Raging Bull was credited to Paul Schrader and
Mardik Martin (who earlier co-wrote Mean Streets), the finished script
differed extensively from Schrader's original draft. It was re-written several
times by various writers including Jay Cocks (who went on to co-script later
Scorsese films The Age of Innocence and Gangs of New York). The final draft
was largely written by Scorsese and Robert De Niro.[19]

#### [edit] The King of Comedy

Main article: The King of Comedy (1983 film)

Scorsese's next project was his fifth collaboration with Robert De Niro, The
King of Comedy (1983). An absurdist satire on the world of media and
celebrity, it was an obvious departure from the more emotionally committed
films he had become associated with. Visually too it was far less kinetic than
the style the director had developed up until this point, often using a static
camera and long takes.[20] The expressionism of his recent work here gave way
to moments of almost total surrealism. However it was still an obvious
Scorsese work, and apart from the New York locale, it bore many similarities
to Taxi Driver, not least of which was its focus on an obsessed troubled loner
who ironically achieves iconic status through a criminal act (murder and
kidnapping, respectively).[21]

The King of Comedy failed at the box office but has become increasingly well
regarded by critics in the years since its release. German director Wim
Wenders numbered it among his fifteen favourite films.[22]

Next Scorsese made a brief cameo appearance in the movie Pavlova: A Woman for
All Time, originally intended to be directed by one of his heroes, Michael
Powell. This led to a more significant role in Bertrand Tavernier's jazz movie
Round Midnight.

In 1983 Scorsese began work on a long-cherished personal project, The Last
Temptation of Christ, based on the 1951 book written by Nikos Kazantzakis (who
was introduced to the director by actress Barbara Hershey when they were both
attending New York University in the late 1960s). The movie was slated to
shoot under the Paramount Pictures banner, but shortly before principal
photography was to commence, Paramount pulled the plug on the project, citing
pressure from religious groups. In this aborted 1983 version, Aidan Quinn was
cast as Jesus, and Sting was cast as Pontius Pilate. (In the 1988 version,
these roles were played respectively by Willem Dafoe and David Bowie.)

#### [edit] After Hours

Main article: After Hours (film)

After the collapse of this project Scorsese again saw his career at a critical
point, as he described in the recent documentary Filming for Your Life: Making
'After Hours' (2004). He saw that in the increasingly commercial world of
1980s Hollywood, the highly stylized and personal 1970s films he and others
had built their careers on would not continue to enjoy the same status.
Scorsese decided then on an almost totally new approach to his work. With
After Hours (1985) he made an aesthetic shift back to a pared-down, almost
"underground" film-making style â his way of staying viable. Filmed on an
extremely low budget, on location, and at night in the SoHo neighborhood of
Manhattan, the film is a black comedy about one increasingly misfortunate
night for a mild New York word processor (Griffin Dunne) and featured cameos
by such disparate actors as Teri Garr and Cheech and Chong. A bit of a
stylistic anomaly for Scorsese, After Hours fits in well with popular low-
budget "cult" films of the 1980s, e.g. Jonathan Demme's Something Wild and
Alex Cox's Repo Man.

#### [edit] The Color of Money

Main article: The Color of Money

Along with the iconic 1987 Michael Jackson music video Bad, in 1986 Scorsese
made The Color of Money, a sequel to the much admired Paul Newman film The
Hustler (1961). (The Hustler was directed by Robert Rossen, whose 1940s boxing
film Body and Soul was a major influence on Raging Bull.) Although typically
visually assured, The Color of Money was the director's first foray into
mainstream commercial film-making. It won actor Paul Newman a belated Oscar
and gave Scorsese the clout to finally secure backing for a project that had
been a long time goal for him: The Last Temptation of Christ. He also made a
brief venture into television, directing an episode of Steven Spielberg's
Amazing Stories.

#### [edit] The Last Temptation of Christ

Main article: The Last Temptation of Christ (film)

After his mid-80s flirtation with commercial Hollywood, Scorsese made a major
return to personal film-making with the Paul Schrader-scripted The Last
Temptation of Christ in 1988. Based on Nikos Kazantzakis's controversial 1951
book, it retold the life of Christ in human rather than divine terms. Even
prior to its release the film caused a massive furor, worldwide protests
against its perceived blasphemy effectively turning a low budget independent
movie into a media sensation.[23] Most controversy centered on the final
passages of the film which depicted Christ marrying and raising a family with
Mary Magdalene in a Satan-induced hallucination while on the cross.

Looking past the controversy, The Last Temptation of Christ gained critical
acclaim and remains an important work in Scorsese's canon: an explicit attempt
to wrestle with the spirituality which had under-pinned his films up until
that point. The director went on to receive his second nomination for a Best
Director Academy Award (again unsuccessfully, this time losing to Barry
Levinson for Rain Man).

Along with directors Woody Allen and Francis Coppola, in 1989 Scorsese
provided one of three segments in the portmanteau film New York Stories,
called "Life Lessons".

### [edit] 1990s

#### [edit] Goodfellas

Main article: Goodfellas

After a decade of mostly mixed results, gangster epic Goodfellas (1990) was a
return to form for Scorsese and his most confident and fully realized film
since Raging Bull. A return to Little Italy, De Niro, and Joe Pesci,
Goodfellas offered a virtuoso display of the director's bravura cinematic
technique and re-established, enhanced, and consolidated his reputation. The
film is widely considered one of the director's greatest
achievements.[24][25][26]

However, Goodfellas also signified an important shift in tone in the
director's work, inaugurating an era in his career which was technically
accomplished but some have argued emotionally detached.[27] Despite this, many
view Goodfellas as a Scorsese archetype â the apogee of his cinematic
technique.

Scorsese earned his third Best Director nomination for Goodfellas but again
lost to a first-time director, Kevin Costner (Dances with Wolves). The film
also earned Joe Pesci an Academy Award (Best Supporting Actor)

In 1990, he acted in a cameo role as Vincent Van Gogh in the film Dreams by
legendary Japanese director Akira Kurosawa.

#### [edit] Cape Fear

Main article: Cape Fear (1991 film)

1991 brought Cape Fear, a remake of a cult 1962 movie of the same name, and
the director's seventh collaboration with De Niro. Another foray in to the
mainstream, the film was a stylized Grand Guignol thriller taking its cues
heavily from Alfred Hitchcock and Charles Laughton's The Night of the Hunter
(1955). Cape Fear received a mixed critical reception and was lambasted in
many quarters for its scenes depicting misogynistic violence. However, the
lurid subject matter did give Scorsese a chance to experiment with a dazzling
array of visual tricks and effects. The film garnered two Oscar nominations.
Earning eighty million dollars domestically, it would stand as Scorsese's most
commercially successful release until The Aviator (2004), and then The
Departed (2006). The film also marked the first time Scorsese used wide-screen
Panavision with an aspect ratio of 2.35:1.

#### [edit] The Age of Innocence

Main article: The Age of Innocence (film)

The opulent and handsomely mounted The Age of Innocence (1993) was on the
surface a huge departure for Scorsese, a period adaptation of Edith Wharton's
novel about the constrictive high society of late-19th Century New York. It
was highly lauded by critics upon original release, but was a box office bomb.
As noted in Scorsese on Scorsese by editor/interviewer Ian Christie, the news
that Scorsese wanted to make a film about a 19th Century failed romance raised
many eyebrows among the film fraternity all the more when Scorsese made it
clear that it was a personal project and not a studio for-hire job.

Scorsese was interested in doing a "romantic piece". His friend, Jay Cocks
gave him the Wharton novel in 1980, suggesting that this should be the
romantic piece Scorsese should film as Cocks felt it best represented his
sensibility. In Scorsese on Scorsese he noted that:

    
    "Although the film deals with New York aristocracy and a period of New York history that has been neglected, and although it deals with code and ritual, and with love that's not unrequited but unconsummated - which pretty much covers all the themes I usually deal with - when I read the book, I didn't say, 'Oh good, all those themes are here.'"
Scorsese who was strongly drawn to the characters and the story of Wharton's
text, wanted his film to be as rich an emotional experience as the book was to
him rather than the traditional academic adaptations of literary works. To
this aim, Scorsese sought influence from diverse period films which made an
emotional impact on him. In Scorsese on Scorsese, he documents influences from
films such as Luchino Visconti's Senso and his Il Gattopardo as well as Orson
Welles's The Magnificent Ambersons and also Roberto Rossellini's La Prise de
Pouvoir par Louis XIV. Although The Age of Innocence was ultimately different
than these films in terms of narrative, story and thematic concern, the
presence of a lost society, of lost values as well as detailed re-creations of
social customs and rituals continues the tradition of these films.

Recently, it has started to come back into the public eye, especially in
countries such as the UK and France, but still is largely neglected in North
America. The film earned five Academy Award nominations (including for
Scorsese for Best Adapted Screenplay), winning the Costume Design Oscar. It
also made a significant impact on directors such as Chinese auteur Tian
Zhuangzhuang,[28] and British film-maker Terence Davies[29] both of whom
ranked it among their ten favourite films.

This was his first collaboration with the Academy Award winning actor, Daniel
Day-Lewis, with whom he would work again in Gangs of New York.

#### [edit] Casino

Main article: Casino (film)

1995's expansive Casino, like The Age of Innocence before it, focused on a
tightly wound male whose well-ordered life is disrupted by the arrival of
unpredictable forces. The fact that it was a violent gangster film made it
more palatable to fans of the director who perhaps were baffled by the
apparent departure of the earlier film. Critically, however, Casino received
mixed notices. In large part this was due to its huge stylistic similarities
to his earlier Goodfellas. Indeed many of the tropes and tricks of the earlier
film resurfaced more or less intact, most obviously the casting of both Robert
DeNiro and Joe Pesci, Pesci once again being an unbridled psychopath. Sharon
Stone was nominated for the Best Actress Academy Award for her performance.

During the filming Scorsese played a background part as a gambler at one of
the tables. It is quite often rumored that a real game of poker was being held
at the time between extras and that a pot of $2000 was at stake. In the Film
Comment issue of January 2000, devoted to the best films of the 90's, Thierry
Fremaux of the Institut LumiÃ¨re stated that, "The best film of the decade is
also the most underrated film of the decade: 'Casino'", while Michael
Wilmington called both GoodFellas and Casino, "Great late pinnacles of
noir".[30]

#### [edit] A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies

Main article: A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies

Scorsese still found time for a four hour documentary in 1995 offering a
thorough trek through American cinema. It covered the silent era to 1969, a
year after which Scorsese began his feature career, stating "I wouldn't feel
right commenting on myself or my contemporaries."

#### [edit] Kundun

Main article: Kundun

If The Age of Innocence alienated and confused some fans, then Kundun (1997)
went several steps further, offering an account of the early life of Tenzin
Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, the People's Liberation Army's entering of Tibet,
and the Dalai Lama's subsequent exile to India. Not least a departure in
subject matter, Kundun also saw Scorsese employing a fresh narrative and
visual approach. Traditional dramatic devices were substituted for a trance-
like meditation achieved through an elaborate tableau of colourful visual
images.[31]

The film was a source of turmoil for its distributor, Disney, who were
planning significant expansion into the Chinese market at the time. Initially
defiant in the face of pressure from Chinese officials, Disney has since
distanced itself from the project, hurting Kundun's commercial profile.

In the short term, the sheer eclecticism in evidence enhanced the director's
reputation. In the long term however, it generally appears Kundun has been
sidelined in most critical appraisals of the director, mostly noted as a
stylistic and thematic detour. Kundun was the director's second attempt to
profile the life of a great religious leader, following The Last Temptation of
Christ.

#### [edit] Bringing Out the Dead

Main article: Bringing Out the Dead

Bringing Out the Dead (1999) was a return to familiar territory, with the
director and writer Paul Schrader constructing a pitch-black comic take on
their own earlier Taxi Driver.[32] Like previous Scorsese-Schrader
collaborations, its final scenes of spiritual redemption explicitly recalled
the films of Robert Bresson.[33] (It's also worth noting that the film's
incident-filled nocturnal setting is reminiscent of After Hours.) It received
generally positive reviews,[34] although not the universal critical acclaim of
some of his other films.

### [edit] 2000s

#### [edit] Gangs of New York

Main article: Gangs of New York

In 1999 Scorsese also produced a documentary on Italian filmmakers entitled Il
Mio Viaggio in Italia, also known as My Voyage to Italy. The documentary
foreshadowed the director's next project, the epic Gangs of New York (2002),
influenced by (amongst many others) major Italian directors such as Luchino
Visconti and filmed in its entirety at Rome's famous CinecittÃ  film studios.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Scorsese at the Gangs of New York screening at the Cannes Film Festival with
Leonardo DiCaprio and Cameron Diaz

With a production budget said to be in excess of $100 million, Gangs of New
York was Scorsese's biggest and arguably most mainstream venture to date. Like
The Age of Innocence, it was set in 19th-century New York, although focusing
on the other end of the social scale (and like that film, also starring Daniel
Day-Lewis). The film also marked the first collaboration between Scorsese and
actor Leonardo DiCaprio, who since then has become a fixture in later Scorsese
films.

The production was highly troubled with many rumors referring to the
director's conflict with Miramax boss Harvey Weinstein.[35] Despite denials of
artistic compromise, Gangs of New York revealed itself to be the director's
most conventional film: standard film tropes which the director had
traditionally avoided, such as characters existing purely for exposition
purposes and explanatory flashbacks, here surfaced in abundance.[36][37][38]
The original score composed by regular Scorsese collaborator Elmer Bernstein
was rejected at a late stage for a score by Howard Shore and mainstream rock
artists U2 and Peter Gabriel.[39] The final cut of the movie ran to 168
minutes, while the director's original cut was over 180 minutes in length.[36]

Nonetheless, the themes central to the film were consistent with the
director's established concerns: New York, violence as culturally endemic, and
sub-cultural divisions down ethnic lines.

Originally filmed for a release in the winter of 2001 (to qualify for Academy
Award nominations), Scorsese delayed the final production of the film until
after the beginning of 2002; the studio consequently delayed the film for
nearly a year until its release in the Oscar season of late 2002.[40]

Gangs of New York earned Scorsese his first Golden Globe for Best Director. In
February 2003, Gangs of New York received ten Academy Award nominations,
including Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Actor for Daniel Day-Lewis.
This was Scorsese's fourth Best Director nomination, and many thought it was
finally his year to win. Ultimately, however, the film took home not a single
Academy Award, and Scorsese lost his category to Roman Polanski for The
Pianist.

2003 also saw the release of The Blues, an expansive seven part documentary
tracing the history of blues music from its African roots to the Mississippi
Delta and beyond. Seven film-makers including Wim Wenders, Clint Eastwood,
Mike Figgis, and Scorsese himself each contributed a 90 minute film
(Scorsese's entry was entitled âFeel Like Going Homeâ).

Scorsese also had uncredited involvement as executive director with the 2002
film Deuces Wild,[41] written Paul Kimatian.

#### [edit] The Aviator

Main article: The Aviator

<IMG>

<IMG>

Scorsese at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival

Scorsese's film The Aviator (2004), was a lavish, large-scale biopic of
eccentric aviation pioneer and film mogul Howard Hughes and would reunite
Scorsese with actor Leonardo DiCaprio. The film received highly positive
reviews,[42][43][44][45][46] The film also met with widespread box office
success and gained Academy recognition.

The Aviator was nominated for six Golden Globe awards, including Best Picture
- Drama, Best Director, Best Screenplay, and Best Actor - Drama for Leonardo
DiCaprio. It won three, including Best Picture and Best Actor- Drama In
January 2005, The Aviator became the most-nominated film of the 77th Academy
Award nominations, nominated in 11 categories including Best Picture. The film
also garnered nominations in nearly all of the other major categories,
including a fifth Best Director nomination for Scorsese, Best Actor (Leonardo
DiCaprio), Best Supporting Actress (Cate Blanchett), and Alan Alda for Best
Supporting Actor. Despite having a leading tally, the film ended up with only
five Oscars: Best Supporting Actress, Art Direction, Costume Design, Film
Editing and Cinematography. Scorsese lost again, this time to director Clint
Eastwood for Million Dollar Baby (which also won Best Picture).

#### [edit] No Direction Home

Main article: No Direction Home

No Direction Home is a documentary film by Martin Scorsese that traces the
life of Bob Dylan, and his impact on American popular music and culture of the
20th century. The film does not cover Dylan's entire career; rather, it
focuses on his beginnings, his rise to fame in the 1960s, his then-
controversial transformation from an acoustic guitar-based musician and
performer to an electric guitar-influenced sound and his "retirement" from
touring in 1966 following an infamous motorcycle accident. The film was first
presented on television in both the United States (as part of the PBS American
Masters series) and the United Kingdom (as part of the BBC Two Arena series)
on September 26â27 2005. A DVD version of the film was released that same
month. The film won a Peabody award. In addition, Scorsese received an Emmy
nomination for Outstanding Directing for Nonfiction Programming.

#### [edit] The Departed

Main article: The Departed

Scorsese returned to the crime genre with the Boston-set thriller The
Departed, based on the Hong Kong police drama Infernal Affairs. Along with
Leonardo DiCaprio, The Departed would feature Scorsese's first collaboration
with Oscar Award winning actors Jack Nicholson and Matt Damon.

The Departed opened to widespread critical acclaim with some proclaiming it as
one of the best efforts Scorsese had brought to the screen since 1990's
Goodfellas,[47][48] and still others putting it at the same level as
Scorsese's most celebrated classics Taxi Driver and Raging Bull.[49][50] With
domestic box office receipts surpassing $129,402,536, The Departed is
Scorsese's highest grossing film (not accounting for inflation).

Martin Scorsese's direction of The Departed earned him his second Golden Globe
for Best Director, as well as a Critic's Choice Award, his first Director's
Guild of America Award, and the Academy Award for Best Director. The latter
was thought to be long overdue, and some entertainment critics subsequently
referred to it as Scorsese's "Lifetime Achievement" Oscar. Some critics indeed
further suggested that Scorsese did not deserve to win for The Departed.[51]
It was presented to him by his longtime friends and colleagues Steven
Spielberg, Francis Ford Coppola, and George Lucas. The Departed also received
the Academy Award for the Best Motion Picture of 2006, Best Adapted
Screenplay, and Best Film Editing by longtime Scorsese editor Thelma
Schoonmaker, her third win for a Scorsese film.

#### [edit] Shine a Light

Main article: Shine a Light (film)

Shine a Light is a concert film of rock and roll band The Rolling Stones'
performances at New York City's Beacon Theater on October 29 and November 1,
2006, intercut with brief news and interview footage from throughout the
band's career.

The film was initially scheduled for release on September 21, 2007, but
Paramount Classics postponed its general release until April 2008. Its world
premiere was at the opening of the 58th Berlinale Film Festival on February 7,
2008.

#### [edit] Shutter Island

Main article: Shutter Island

On October 22, 2007, the Daily Variety reported that Scorsese will reunite
with Leonardo DiCaprio on a fourth picture, Shutter Island. Principal
photography on the Laeta Kalogridis screenplay, based on the novel of the same
name by Dennis Lehane, began in Massachusetts in March 2008.[52][53] The
project was later retitled Ashecliffe.

In December 2007, actors Mark Ruffalo, Ben Kingsley, and Michelle Williams
joined the cast.[54][55] The film is slated to be released on October 2,
2009.[56]

### [edit] Future films

Scorsese announced his intention to shoot a film based on Shusaku Endoâs
novel, Silence. Silence will begin shooting in New Zealand in 2009, with
Daniel Day-Lewis, Gael Garcia Bernal, and Benicio del Toro set to star.

Scorsese is also shooting an upcoming documentary on the life of Beatle member
George Harrison. Scorsese has also been in contact with reputed mobster John
Martarano concerning the upcoming film "The Executioner". Scorsese and De Niro
plan to reunite with a film adaptation of the Charles Brandt novel I Heard You
Paint Houses, about the life of Frank Sheeran. Scorsese also plans to cast
Leonardo DiCaprio in two more films, The Wolf of Wall Street and a film
adaptation of The Rise of Theodore Roosevelt.

Scorsese has also recently announced his involvement on an upcoming HBO
series, Boardwalk Empire, based upon Nelson Johnson's book Boardwalk Empire:
The Birth, High Times and Corruption of Atlantic City. The series will be
produced by Entourage duo Mark Wahlberg and Stephen Levinson and is written by
The Sopranos scribe Terence Winter.[57] It stars Steve Buscemi and Michael
Pitt. Scorsese will direct the pilot episode.[58]

## [edit] Pop cultural influence

  * In an episode of American Dad! titled "The Best Christmas Story Never", Stan convinces Scorsese to stop taking drugs in the 70s, causing Scorsese not to make the film Taxi Driver, leading to an alternate timeline where the Soviet Union had conquered the United States.
  * In an episode of The Simpsons titled A Star Is Burns, Marge Simpson crosses out Scorsese's name as a film critic at the Springfield Film Festival in favor of Homer.
  * The band King Missile included on its 1992 album Happy Hour a song entitled "Martin Scorsese," in which frontman John S. Hall assumes the persona of a crazed Scorsese obsessive who wishes to express his appreciation of the director's work by savagely assaulting him.
  * In the 1990s animated TV show Animaniacs, the Goodfeathers, a gang of pigeons based on the three main characters in the film Goodfellas, hang out at a statue of the director.
  * In an episode of the HBO series The Sopranos, Christopher Moltisanti sees Scorsese (an actor portraying Scorsese) going into a club and yells out at him "Hey! Marty! Kundun! I liked it!"
  * Scorsese appears as himself in the Curb Your Enthusiasm episodes "The Special Section" and "Krazee Eyez Killa".
  * In TV show Friends, Joey Tribbiani mentions he could get a job with 'the NEXT, NEXT Martin Scorsese', since 'the NEXT Martin Scorsese' already exists, being a guy from Boston.
  * In 2007, Scorsese was listed among Time magazine's 100 Most Influential People in The World.
  * Scorsese appeared in a series of American Express commercials as a director.
  * Scorsese directed two commercials for Armani in the 80s. They were not seen in the US.
  * In August 2007 Scorsese was named the 2nd greatest director of all time in a poll by Total Film magazine, in front of Steven Spielberg and behind Alfred Hitchcock.
  * In the movie "Singles", the girl behind the counter of the video dating service alleges that her co-worker Brian (played by Tim Burton) should direct Debbie's (Sheila Kelley) video, claiming that he is the "next Martin Scorsese".
  * In the online mockmentary "Pure Pwnage", the characters refer to Martin Scorsese's last name few times in the show. A scene of the character Doug looking in the mirror pointing a plastic gun at his reflection is a reference to a similar scene in Taxi Driver.
  * In the movie Threesome, the main characters ask their less gifted friend whether she likes Scorsese and she responds "No, I don't eat spicy food".
  * In the computer game, "Mafia: The City of Lost Heaven", the import company's name is Scorsese.
  * He appeared as himself in the HBO TV series "Entourage", offering the main character Vincent Chase the lead role of Nick Carraway in a modern day adaptation of The Great Gatsby.
  * In Jibjab.com's 2007 year in review, the phrase "Marty won one finally" is sung referring to his Oscar win in 2007 for directing.
  * In the television show, "30 Rock", Martin Scorsese is mentioned as directing the Janis Joplin biopic, starring Julia Roberts.

## [edit] Director trademarks

  * Begins his films with segments taken from the middle or end of the story. Examples include Raging Bull (1980),[59] Goodfellas (1990),[60] Casino (1995),[61] and The Last Waltz.[62]
  * Frequent use of slow motion, e.g. Mean Streets (1973), Taxi Driver (1976), Raging Bull (1980).[63]
  * His lead characters are often sociopathic and/or want to be accepted in society.[64]
  * His blonde leading ladies are usually seen through the eyes of the protagonist as angelic and ethereal; they always wear white in their first scene and are photographed in slow-motion (Cybill Shepherd in Taxi Driver; Cathy Moriarty's white bikini in Raging Bull; Sharon Stone's white minidress in Casino).[65] This may possibly be a nod to director Alfred Hitchcock.[66]
  * Often uses long tracking shots.[67]
  * Use of MOS sequences set to popular music or voice over, often involving aggressive camera movement and/or rapid editing.[68]
  * Often has a quick cameo in his films (Mean Streets, Taxi Driver, The King of Comedy, After Hours, The Last Temptation of Christ (albeit hidden under a hood), The Age of Innocence, Gangs of New York). Also, often contributes his voice to a film without showing his face on screen. E.g., provides the opening voice-over narration in Mean Streets and The Color of Money; plays the off-screen dressing room attendant in the final scene of Raging Bull; provides the voice of the unseen ambulance dispatcher in Bringing out the Dead.[69]
  * Frequently uses New York City as the main setting in his films, eg. Gangs of New York, Taxi Driver, The Age of Innocence, After Hours, New York, New York.[70]
  * Sometimes highlights characters in a scene with an iris, an homage to 1920s silent film cinema (as most scenes at the time used this transition). This effect can be seen in Casino (it is used on Sharon Stone and Joe Pesci), Life Lessons, and The Departed (on Matt Damon).
  * Some of his films include references/allusions to classic Westerns particularly Shane and The Searchers.
  * More recently, his films have featured corrupt authority figures, such as policemen in The Departed[71] and politicians in Gangs of New York[72] and The Aviator.[73]
  * Guilt is a prominent theme in many of his films, as is the role of Catholicism in creating and dealing with guilt (Raging Bull, GoodFellas, Bringing Out the Dead, Mean Streets, Who's That Knocking at My Door, etc.)

## [edit] Scorsese's Circle

Scorsese has been known to cast the same actors in his films, particularly
Robert De Niro, who collaborated with Scorsese for eight films. Included are
the three films that made the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies list. Though a
majority of critics cite Raging Bull to be De Niro's best performance,
Scorsese has often stated that he thought Robert De Niro's best work under his
direction was Rupert Pupkin in The King of Comedy. Most recently, Scorsese has
found a new muse with young actor Leonardo DiCaprio, with whom he has
collaborated for three films, with two others confirmed to be in the works.
[74] Several critics have compared Scorsese's new partnership with DiCaprio
with his previous one with De Niro. [75][76] Other frequent collaborators
include Victor Argo (6), Harry Northup (6), Harvey Keitel (5), Murray Moston
(5), Joe Pesci (3), Frank Vincent (3), Verna Bloom (3), Steven Prince (2),
Barbara Hershey (2), Alec Baldwin (2), David Carradine (2), Willem Dafoe (2),
Nick Nolte (2) and John C. Reilly (2). Scorsese has also collaborated twice
with the acclaimed actor Daniel Day-Lewis, who had become very reclusive to
the Hollywood scene. Before their deaths, Scorese's parents, Charles and
Catherine, would be given bit parts, walk-ons, or supporting roles.

For his crew, Scorsese frequently worked with editor Thelma Schoonmaker,[77]
cinematographers Michael Ballhaus[78] and Robert Richardson, screenwriters
Paul Schrader and Mardik Martin, costume designer Sandy Powell, production
designer Dante Ferretti, and composers Robbie Robertson, Howard Shore[79] and
Elmer Bernstein[80]. Schoonmaker, Richardson, Powell, and Ferretti have all
won Academy Awards in their respective categories due to their collaborations
with Scorsese. Elaine and Saul Bass, the latter being Hitchcock's title
designer of choice, have designed the opening credits for Goodfellas, The Age
of Innocence, Casino and Cape Fear. He was the executive producer of the film
"Brides," which was directed by Pantelis Voulgaris and starred Victoria
Haralabidou, Damien Lewis, Steven Berkoff and Kosta Sommer.

## [edit] TV Venture

Aleksa Palladino, Paul Sparks, Shea Whigham and Anthony Laciura round out the
cast of "Boardwalk Empire," Martin Scorsese's drama pilot for HBO. Written by
Terence Winter and to be directed by Scorsese, the series chronicles the early
20th century origins of Atlantic City and revolves around Nucky Johnson (Steve
Buscemi), who runs a liquor-distribution ring, and Jimmy Darmody (Michael
Pitt), his ruthless flunky.[81]

## [edit] Awards and Recognitions

Sister project Wikinews has related news: Kennedy Center names 2007 honors
recipients  
  * On September 11, 2007, the prestigious Kennedy Center Honors committee which recognizes career excellence and cultural influence named Scorsese as one of the honorees at the ceremony to be held on December 1.
  * At a ceremony in Paris, France, on January 5, 2005, Martin Scorsese was awarded the French Legion of Honor in recognition of his contribution to cinema.
  * In 2007 Scorsese won the Academy Award for Best Director for The Departed, which also won Best Picture.

## [edit] Filmography (as director)

Year Film No. of Oscar Nominations No. of Oscar Wins  
1963 What's a Nice Girl Like You Doing in a Place Like This?  
1964 It's Not Just You, Murray!  
1967 The Big Shave  
Who's That Knocking at My Door, originally titled I Call First  
1970 Street Scenes  
1972 Boxcar Bertha  
1973 Mean Streets  
1974 Italianamerican  
Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore 3 1  
1976 Taxi Driver 4 0  
1977 New York, New York  
1978 The Last Waltz  
American Boy: A Profile of Steven Prince  
1980 Raging Bull 8 2  
1983 The King of Comedy  
1985 After Hours  
1986 The Color of Money 4 1  
1987 Bad (music video with Michael Jackson)  
1988 The Last Temptation of Christ 1 0  
1989 New York Stories (segment Life's Lessons)  
1990 Goodfellas 6 1  
1991 Cape Fear 2 0  
1993 The Age of Innocence 5 1  
1995 Casino 1 0  
1997 Kundun 4  
1999 Bringing Out the Dead  
2002 Gangs of New York 10 0  
2004 The Aviator 11 5  
2005 No Direction Home: Bob Dylan 4 (Emmys) 1 (Emmys)  
2006 The Departed 5 4  
2007 The Key to Reserva (short)  
2008 Shine a Light  
2009 Ashecliffe  
## [edit] Selected filmography (as actor)

1973 Mean Streets (cameo) as Jimmy Shorts  
1976 Taxi Driver (cameo) as Passenger in Travis' Cab  
1978 The Last Waltz (as himself)  
1983 The King of Comedy (cameo) as TV Director  
1986 Round Midnight as Goodley  
1990 Dreams as Vincent Van Gogh  
1994 Quiz Show as Martin Rittenhome  
1999 The Muse (as himself)  
1999 Bringing Out the Dead (dispatcher)  
2004 Shark Tale (voice) Sykes  
2008 Entourage (as himself)  
## [edit] See also

  * List of directors
  * List of film collaborations

## [edit] References

  1. ^ The Religious Affiliation of Director Martin Scorsese Webpage created 27 May 2005. Last modified 5 September 2005. Accessed 1 April 2007.
  2. ^ Yahoo! Movies
  3. ^ Martin Scorsese Biography (1942-)
  4. ^ Chris Ingui. "Martin Scorsese hits DC, hangs with the Hachet". Hatchet. http://www.gwhatchet.com/media/storage/paper332/news/2002/03/04/Arts/Martin.Scorsese.Hits.Dc.Hangs.With.The.Hachet-195598.shtml?norewrite200607071207&sourcedomain=www.gwhatchet.com. Retrieved on 2006-06-29.
  5. ^ Chris Ingui. "Martin Scorsese hits DC, hangs with the Hachet". Hatchet. http://media.www.gwhatchet.com/media/storage/paper332/news/2002/03/04/Arts/Martin.Scorsese.Hits.Dc.Hangs.With.The.Hachet-195598.shtml?norewrite200607071207&sourcedomain=www.gwhatchet.com. Retrieved on 2006-06-29.
  6. ^ ([dead link] â Scholar search)Asthma Awareness Day, Capitol Hill 2003, Annual Awards Campaign, 2003, http://www.aanma.org/cityhall/ch_aad_campaign.htm#scorsese, retrieved on 2008-07-15
  7. ^ Raymond, Marc (May 2002), Martin Scorsese, http://www.sensesofcinema.com/contents/directors/02/scorsese.html
  8. ^ "Finding the boy again". Scotsman. http://thescotsman.scotsman.com/s2.cfm?id=386832002. [dead link]
  9. ^ a b Scorsese on DVD (Film Freak Central)
  10. ^ Hinson, Hal (1991-11-24). "Scorsese, Master Of The Rage". Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A99967-1991Nov24.html.
  11. ^ Ebert, Roger (March 7, 1976), "Interview with Martin Scorsese", Rogerebert.com (Chicago Sun-Times), http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/19760307/PEOPLE/603070302
  12. ^ Citizen Bickle, or the Allusive Taxi Driver: Uses of Intertextuality
  13. ^ "'I was in a bad place'". Guardian. 2006-07-06. http://film.guardian.co.uk/interview/interviewpages/0,,1813797,00.html.
  14. ^ "Festival Archives: Taxi Driver". Festival de Cannes. http://www.festival-cannes.fr/index.php/en/archives/film/2123. Retrieved on 2008-02-14.
  15. ^ Williams, Alex (2003-01-03). "'Are we ever going to make this picture?'". Guardian. http://film.guardian.co.uk/interview/interviewpages/0,6737,867652,00.html.
  16. ^ Malcolm, Derek (1999-12-09). "Martin Scorsese: Raging Bull". Guardian. http://film.guardian.co.uk/Century_Of_Films/Story/0,,112416,00.html.
  17. ^ Snider, Mike (2005-02-07). "'Raging Bull' returns to the ring". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/life/movies/news/2005-02-07-dvd-raging-bull_x.htm.
  18. ^ Raging Bull
  19. ^ Morris, Mark (1999-10-31). "Ageing bulls return". Observer. http://film.guardian.co.uk/Feature_Story/feature_story/0,,98151,00.html.
  20. ^ The King of Comedy
  21. ^ The King of Comedy Film Review
  22. ^ Wim Wenders - The Official Site
  23. ^ Martin Scorsese's The Last Temptation of Christ
  24. ^ :: rogerebert.com :: Reviews :: GoodFellas (xhtml)
  25. ^ GoodFellas
  26. ^ GoodFellas (1990)
  27. ^ Goodfellas (Wide Screen)
  28. ^ http://www.bfi.org.uk/sightandsound/topten/poll/voter.php?forename=Tian&surname=Zhuang-Zhuang
  29. ^ http://www.bfi.org.uk/sightandsound/topten/poll/voter.php?forename=Terence&surname=Davies
  30. ^ http://www.filmlinc.com/fcm/1-2-2000/decade.htm
  31. ^ Kundun - Time Out
  32. ^ Bringing Out The Dead
  33. ^ Reinert on Bringing Out the Dead
  34. ^ rottentomatoes.com, Bringing Out the Dead Entry, accessed January 29, 2007
  35. ^ Gangs of Los Angeles | News | Guardian Unlimited Film
  36. ^ a b Gangs of New York | Reviews | Guardian Unlimited Film
  37. ^ Compare Prices and Read Reviews on Gangs of New York at Epinions.com
  38. ^ Past master | Features | Guardian Unlimited Film
  39. ^ ScoreTrack.Net - Music for The Movies: Elmer Bernstein
  40. ^ In briefs: Gangs of New York release delayed again
  41. ^ IMDB: Dueces Wild credits
  42. ^ rottentomatoes.com, The Aviator entry, accessed January 24, 2007
  43. ^ Are you talking to me - again?
  44. ^ Right guy, wrong film
  45. ^ Empire Reviews Central - Review of The Aviator
  46. ^ Rolling Stone : Aviator : Review
  47. ^ REVIEW: DEPARTED, THE
  48. ^ Movie Review - Departed, The - eFilmCritic
  49. ^ Reel Views
  50. ^ All Movie - The Departed
  51. ^ "Scorsese wins with film thatâs not his best". MSNBC. 2007-02-27. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/17351684/.
  52. ^ Michael Fleming (2007). "Scorsese, DiCaprio team for 'Island'". http://www.variety.com/VR1117974525.html?query=shutter+island.
  53. ^ "Scorsese, Leo head to 'Shutter Island". 2007. http://www.upi.com/NewsTrack/Entertainment/2007/10/23/scorsese_leo_head_to_shutter_island/7373/.
  54. ^ Tatiana Siegel (2007-12-03). "Kingsley signs on to 'Shutter Island'". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117976953.html?categoryid=1236&cs=1. Retrieved on 2008-01-08.
  55. ^ Michael Fleming (2007-12-06). "Michelle Williams joins 'Island'". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117977184.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2008-01-08.
  56. ^ Pamela McClintock (2008-02-13). "'Star Trek' pushed back to 2009". Variety. http://www.variety.com/VR1117980912.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-13.
  57. ^ Michael Schneider (2008). "Winter on Scorsese's 'Boardwalk'". http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117986819.html?categoryid=14&cs=1&nid=2563.
  58. ^ Nellie Andreeva (2008). "Michael Pitt set for Scorsese's HBO pilot". http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/content_display/television/news/e3i4bf70b129a075208c142e2f2326f83a6.
  59. ^ Raging Bull by Tim Dirks, Filmsite.org (online), 2008
  60. ^ Goodfellas by Tim Dirks, Filmsite.org (online), 2008
  61. ^ Casino Script Screenplays For You (online), 1995
  62. ^ Rock Doc Philidelpia Weekly (online), April 17 2002
  63. ^ Martin Scorsese by Marc Raymond, Senses of Cinema (online), May 2002
  64. ^ Martin Scorsese: Master of Violence by Nicholas Tana, Moving Pictures Magazine (online)
  65. ^ Martin Scorsese, Frankie's Films (online), January 2007
  66. ^ Hitchcock and Women
  67. ^ Coyle, Jake (2007-12-29). "'Atonement' brings the long tracking shot back into focus". Boston Globe. http://www.boston.com/ae/movies/articles/2007/12/29/atonement_brings_the_long_tracking_shot_back_into_focus/?page=1.
  68. ^ Martin Scorseseâs Comfortable State of Anxiety by Timothy Rhys, Movie Maker Magazine (online), October 16 2002
  69. ^ Most Famous Film Director Cameos by Tim Dirks, Filmsite.org (online), 2008
  70. ^ Sanders, James (October 2006). Scenes from the City: Filmmaking in New York. New York: Rizzoli, 288 Pages. ISBN 0847828905
  71. ^ Revisiting Southie's culture of death By Michael Patrick MacDonald, The Boston Globe (online), October 11 2006
  72. ^ Gangs of New York Review by Roger Ebert, Chicago Sun-Times (online), December 20 2002
  73. ^ High Rollers by David Denby, The New Yorker (online), December 20 2004
  74. ^ Leo & Marty: Yes, Again!
  75. ^ Scorsese Likens DiCaprio To De Niro
  76. ^ Successful Hollywood Duos
  77. ^ IMDb list of films featuring Scorsese and Schoonmaker
  78. ^ Michael Ballhaus, ASC takes on Martin Scorsese's Gangs of New York, a 19th-century tale of vengeance and valor set in the city's most notorious neighborhood.
  79. ^ Scorsese Films: The Aviator.
  80. ^ Some You Win.
  81. ^ http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/content_display/television/news/e3i435ae21676ac96700bbcc7e10282c45a

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Martin Scorsese  
Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Martin
Scorsese  
  * Martin Scorsese at the Internet Movie Database
  * Martin Scorsese at the TCM Movie Database
  * Martin Scorsese at Senses of Cinema
  * Works by or about Martin Scorsese in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
  * Martin Scorsese Bibliography (via UC Berkeley)
  * They Shoot Pictures, Don't They?
  * Scorsese interviews on BBC
  * 1999 Princeton Q&A lecture (RealMedia video)
  * Podcast: Scorsese Discusses His Digital Workflow Techniques
  * Martin Scorsese Tops UGO's List for Best Uses of Classic Rock in Cinema
  * Literature

Preceded by  
Clint Eastwood AFI Life Achievement Award  
1997 Succeeded by  
Robert Wise  
Awards and achievements  
Cannes Film Festival  
Preceded by  
Mohammed Lakhdar-Hamina  
for Chronicle of the Years of Fire Palme d'Or  
for Taxi Driver  
1976 Succeeded by  
Paolo and Vittorio Taviani  
for Padre Padrone  
Preceded by  
AndrÃ© TÃ©chinÃ©  
for Rendez-vous Award for Best Director  
for After Hours  
1986 Succeeded by  
Wim Wenders  
for Wings of Desire  
BAFTA Award  
Preceded by  
Kenneth Branagh  
for Henry V BAFTA Award for Best Direction  
for GoodFellas  
1990 Succeeded by  
Alan Parker  
for The Commitments  
Venice Film Festival  
Preceded by  
JoÃ£o CÃ©sar Monteiro  
for RecordaÃ§Ãµes da Casa Amarela  
and Kei Kumai  
for Sen no Rikyu Silver Lion for Best Director  
for GoodFellas  
1990 Succeeded by  
Bigas Luna  
for Jamon, Jamon  
Golden Globe Award  
Preceded by  
Robert Altman  
for Gosford Park Best Director  
for Gangs of New York  
2003 Succeeded by  
Peter Jackson  
for The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King  
Preceded by  
Ang Lee  
for Brokeback Mountain Best Director  
for The Departed  
2007 Succeeded by  
Julian Schnabel  
for The Diving Bell and the Butterfly  
Academy Award and Directors Guild of America Award  
Preceded by  
Ang Lee  
for Brokeback Mountain Best Director  
for The Departed  
2006 Succeeded by  
Joel Coen, Ethan Coen  
for No Country For Old Men  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Films by Martin Scorsese  
1960s

Who's That Knocking at My Door (1967)  
1970s

Boxcar Bertha (1972)  â¢ Mean Streets (1973)  â¢ Alice Doesn't Live Here
Anymore (1974)  â¢ Taxi Driver (1976)  â¢ New York, New York (1977)  
1980s

Raging Bull (1980)  â¢ The King of Comedy (1983)  â¢ After Hours (1985)  â¢
The Color of Money (1986)  â¢ The Last Temptation of Christ (1988)  
1990s

Goodfellas (1990)  â¢ Cape Fear (1991)  â¢ The Age of Innocence (1993)  â¢
Casino (1995)  â¢ Kundun (1997)  â¢ Bringing Out the Dead (1999)  
2000s

Gangs of New York (2002)  â¢ The Aviator (2004)  â¢ The Departed (2006)  â¢
Ashecliffe (2009)  
Shorts

What's a Nice Girl Like You Doing in a Place Like This? (1963)  â¢ It's Not
Just You, Murray! (1964)  â¢ The Big Shave (1967)  â¢ Life Lessons (1989)
â¢ The Key To Reserva (2007)  
Documentaries

Street Scenes (1970)  â¢ Italianamerican (1974)  â¢ American Boy: A Profile
of Steven Prince (1978)  â¢ The Last Waltz (1978)  â¢ A Personal Journey
with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies (1995)  â¢ My Voyage to Italy
(1999)  â¢ The Blues (2003)  â¢ No Direction Home (2005)  â¢ Shine a Light
(2008)  
Produced

You Can Count on Me (2000)  â¢ Nyfes (2004)  â¢ The Young Victoria (2009)
â¢ Where Love Reigns (TBA)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Academy Award for Best Director  
Ron Howard (2001) Â· Roman Polanski (2002) Â· Peter Jackson (2003) Â· Clint
Eastwood (2004) Â· Ang Lee (2005) Â· Martin Scorsese (2006) Â· Joel Coen /
Ethan Coen (2007) Â· Danny Boyle (2008)

* * *
Complete List Â· (1927â1940) Â· (1941â1960) Â· (1961â1980) Â·
(1981â2000) Â· (2001-present)  
  

Persondata  
NAME Scorsese, Martin  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES Scorsese, Martin Marcantonio Luciano  
SHORT DESCRIPTION American film director  
DATE OF BIRTH November 17, 1942  
PLACE OF BIRTH Flushing, New York, United States  
DATE OF DEATH  
PLACE OF DEATH  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Scorsese"

Categories: 1942 births | American Roman Catholics | American documentary
filmmakers | American film directors | American music video directors | BAFTA
winners (people) | Best Director Academy Award winners | Best Director Golden
Globe winners | CÃ©sar Award winners | Grammy Award winners | Italian-American
film directors | Kennedy Center honorees | LÃ©gion d'honneur recipients |
Living people | New York University alumni | People from Queens | Sicilian-
Americans | Venice Best Director Silver Lion winners

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since March 2009 | Articles with dead external links since
February 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Latina
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Occitan
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¥à¤à¥à¤¤
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 00:01.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



