
# Data Protection Directive

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

  (Redirected from Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of personal data)

Jump to: navigation, search

The Data Protection Directive (officially Directive 95/46/EC on the protection
of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data) is a European Union directive which regulates the
processing of personal data within the European Union. It is an important
component of EU privacy and human rights law. The directive was implemented in
1995 by the European Commission.

## Contents

  * 1 Context
  * 2 Content
    * 2.1 Scope
    * 2.2 Principles
      * 2.2.1 Transparency
      * 2.2.2 Legitimate purpose
      * 2.2.3 Proportionality
    * 2.3 Supervisory authority and the public register of processing operations
    * 2.4 Transfer of personal data to third countries
  * 3 Implementation by the member states
  * 4 See also
  * 5 Notes
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Context

The right to privacy is a highly developed area of law in Europe. All the
member states of the European Union (EU) are also signatories of the European
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). Article 8 of the ECHR provides a right to
respect for one's "private and family life, his home and his correspondence,"
subject to certain restrictions. The European Court of Human Rights has given
this article a very broad interpretation in its jurisprudence. In 1981 the
Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic
Processing of Personal Data was negotiated within the Council of Europe. This
convention obliges the signatories to enact legislation concerning the
automatic processing of personal data, which many duly did.

In order to understand the Directive, it is necessary to understand how and
why EU and US perspectives on data protection and privacy are different. The
United States prefers what is called a 'sectoral' approach to data protection
legislation, relying on a combination of legislation, regulation, and self-
regulation, rather than overarching governmental regulations.[1] Former U.S.
President Bill Clinton and former Vice President Al Gore explicitly
recommended in their âFramework for Global Electronic Commerceâ that the
private sector should lead, and companies should implement self-regulation in
reaction to issues brought on by Internet technology.[2] To date, the US has
no single, overarching privacy law comparable to the EU Directive.[3] Privacy
legislation in the United States tends to be adopted on an âas neededâ
basis, with legislation arising when certain sectors and circumstances require
(e.g., the Video Protection Act of 1988, the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Fair Credit Reporting Act).
Therefore, while certain sectors may already satisfy the EU Directive, at
least in part, most do not.[4]

The reasoning behind this approach probably has as much to do with American
laissez-faire economics as with different social perspectives. The First
Amendment of the United States Constitution guarantees the right to free
speech.[5] While free speech is an explicit right guaranteed by the United
States Constitution, privacy is an implicit right guaranteed by the
Constitution as interpreted by the United States Supreme Court.[6]

Europeans are acutely familiar with the dangers associated with uncontrolled
use of personal information from their experiences under World War II-era
fascist governments and post-War Communist regimes, and are highly suspicious
and fearful of unchecked use of personal information.[7] World War II and the
post-War period was a time in Europe that disclosure of race or ethnicity led
to secret denunciations and seizures that sent friends and neighbors to work
camps and concentration camps.[8] Europe has experienced atrocities directly
related to privacy and the release of personal information inconceivable to
most Americans. In the age of computers, Europeansâ guardedness of secret
government files has translated into a distrust of corporate databases, and
governments in Europe took decided steps to protect personal information from
abuses in the years following World War II.[9] Germany and France, in
particular, set forth comprehensive data protection laws.[10]

In 1980, in an effort to create a comprehensive data protection system
throughout Europe, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) issued its âRecommendations of the Council Concerning Guidelines
Governing the Protection of Privacy and Trans-Border Flows of Personal
Data.â[11] The seven principles governing the OECDâs recommendations for
protection of personal data were:

  1. Noticeâdata subjects should be given notice when their data is being collected;
  2. Purposeâdata should only be used for the purpose stated and not for any other purposes;
  3. Consentâdata should not be disclosed without the data subjectâs consent;
  4. Securityâcollected data should be kept secure from any potential abuses;
  5. Disclosureâdata subjects should be informed as to who is collecting their data;
  6. Accessâdata subjects should be allowed to access their data and make corrections to any inaccurate data; and
  7. Accountabilityâdata subjects should have a method available to them to hold data collectors accountable for following the above principles.[12]

The OECD Guidelines, however, were nonbinding, and data privacy laws still
varied widely across Europe. The US, meanwhile, while endorsing the OECDâs
recommendations, did nothing to implement them within the United States.[13]
However, all seven principles were incorporated into the EU Directive.[14]

The European Commission realised that diverging data protection legislation in
the EU member states would impede the free flow of data within the EU zone.
Therefore the European Commission decided to harmonize data protection
regulation and proposed the Directive on the protection of personal data.

## [edit] Content

The directive regulates the processing of personal data, regardless if the
processing is automated or not.

### [edit] Scope

Personal data are defined as "any information relating to an identified or
identifiable natural person ("data subject"); an identifiable person is one
who can be identified, directly or indirectly, in particular by reference to
an identification number or to one or more factors specific to his physical,
physiological, mental, economic, cultural or social identity;" (art. 2 a)

This definition is meant to be very broad. Data are "personal data" when
someone is able to link the information to a person, even if the person
holding the data cannot make this link. Some examples of "personal data" are:
address, credit card number, bank statements, criminal record, etc.

The notion processing means "any operation or set of operations which is
performed upon personal data, whether or not by automatic means, such as
collection, recording, organization, storage, adaptation or alteration,
retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or
otherwise making available, alignment or combination, blocking, erasure or
destruction;" (art. 2 b)

The responsibility for compliance rests on the shoulders of the "controller",
meaning the natural or artificial person, public authority, agency or any
other body which alone or jointly with others determines the purposes and
means of the processing of personal data; (art. 2 d)

The data protection rules are applicable not only when the controller is
established within the EU, but whenever the controller uses equipment situated
within the EU in order to process data. (art. 4) Controllers from outside the
EU, processing data in the EU, will have to follow data protection regulation.
In principle, any online business trading with EU citizens would process some
personal data and would be using equipment in the EU to process the data (i.e.
the customer's computer). As a consequence, the website operator would have to
comply with the European data protection rules. The directive was written
before the breakthrough of the Internet, and to date there is little
jurisprudence on this subject.

### [edit] Principles

Personal data should not be processed at all, except when certain conditions
are met. These conditions fall into three categories: transparency, legitimate
purpose and proportionality.

#### [edit] Transparency

The data subject has the right to be informed when his personal data are being
processed. The controller must provide his name and address, the purpose of
processing, the recipients of the data and all other information required to
ensure the processing is fair. (art. 10 and 11)

Data may be processed only under the following circumstances (art. 7):

  * when the data subject has given his consent
  * when the processing is necessary for the performance of or the entering into a contract
  * when processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation
  * when processing is necessary in order to protect the vital interests of the data subject
  * processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller or in a third party to whom the data are disclosed
  * processing is necessary for the purposes of the legitimate interests pursued by the controller or by the third party or parties to whom the data are disclosed, except where such interests are overridden by the interests for fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject

The data subject has the right to access all data processed about him. The
data subject even has the right to demand the rectification, deletion or
blocking of data that is incomplete, inaccurate or isn't being processed in
compliance with the data protection rules. (art. 12)

#### [edit] Legitimate purpose

Personal data can only be processed for specified explicit and legitimate
purposes and may not be processed further in a way incompatible with those
purposes. (art. 6 b)

#### [edit] Proportionality

Personal data may be processed only insofar as it is adequate, relevant and
not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are collected and/or
further processed. The data must be accurate and, where necessary, kept up to
date; every reasonable step must be taken to ensure that data which are
inaccurate or incomplete, having regard to the purposes for which they were
collected or for which they are further processed, are erased or rectified;
The data shouldn't be kept in a form which permits identification of data
subjects for longer than is necessary for the purposes for which the data were
collected or for which they are further processed. Member States shall lay
down appropriate safeguards for personal data stored for longer periods for
historical, statistical or scientific use. (art. 6)

When sensitive personal data (can be: religious beliefs, political opinions,
health, sexual orientation, race, membership of past organisations) are being
processed, extra restrictions apply. (art. 8)

The data subject may object at any time to the processing of personal data for
the purpose of direct marketing. (art. 14)

A decision which produces legal effects or significantly affects the data
subject may not be based solely on automated processing of data. (art. 15) A
form of appeal should be provided when automatic decision making processes are
used.

### [edit] Supervisory authority and the public register of processing
operations

Each member state must set up a supervisory authority, an independent body
that will monitor the data protection level in that member state, give advice
to the government about administrative measures and regulations, and start
legal proceedings when data protection regulation has been violated. (art. 28)
Individuals may lodge complaints about violations to the supervisory authority
or in a court of law.

The controller must notify the supervisory authority before he starts to
process data. The notification contains at least the following information
(art. 19):

  * the name and address of the controller and of his representative, if any;
  * the purpose or purposes of the processing;
  * a description of the category or categories of data subject and of the data or categories of data relating to them;
  * the recipients or categories of recipient to whom the data might be disclosed;
  * proposed transfers of data to third countries;
  * a general description of the measures taken to ensure security of processing.

This information is kept in a public register.

### [edit] Transfer of personal data to third countries

Third countries is the term used in EU legislation to designate countries
outside the European Union. Personal data may only be transferred to third
countries if that country provides an adequate level of protection. Some
exceptions to this rule are provided, for instance when the controller himself
can guarantee that the recipient will comply with the data protection rules.

The European Commission has set up the "Working party on the Protection of
Individuals with regard to the Processing of Personal Data," commonly known as
the "Article 29 Working Party". The Working Party gives advice about the level
of protection in the European Union and third countries.

The Working Party negotiated with U.S. representatives about the protection of
personal data, the Safe Harbor Principles were the result. According to
critics the Safe Harbor Principles do not provide for an adequate level of
protection, because it contains less obligations for the controller and allows
the contractual waiver of certain rights.

In July 2007, a new, controversial [15], Passenger Name Record agreement
between the US and the EU was undersigned. [16]

In February 2008, Jonathan Faull, the head of the EU's Commission of Home
Affairs, complained about the US bilateral policy concerning PNR [17]. The US
had signed in February 2008 a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the Czech
Republic in exchange of a visa waiver scheme, without concerting before with
Brussels [15]. The tensions between Washington and Brussels are mainly caused
by a lesser level of data protection in the US, especially since foreigners do
not benefit from the US Privacy Act of 1974. Other countries approached for
bilateral MOU included the United Kingdom, Estonia, Germany and Greece [18].

## [edit] Implementation by the member states

EU directives are addressed to the member states, and aren't legally binding
for citizens in principle. The member states must transpose the directive into
internal law. Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of personal data had to be
transposed by the end of 1998. All member states have enacted their own data
protection legislation.

## [edit] See also

  * privacy
  * data privacy
  * Information Commissioner
  * Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (USA)
  * Safe harbor
  * Information technology audit
  * Auditing information security
  * International Safe Harbor Privacy Principles

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ See William J. Clinton & Albert Gore, Jr., A Framework for Global Electronic Commerce, July 1, 1997, available at http://www.technology.gov/digeconomy/framewrk.htm); See also Robert R. Schriver, You Cheated, You Lied: the Safe Harbor Agreement and Its Enforcement By the Federal Trade Commission, 70 Fordham L. Rev. 2777, 2779 (2002)
  2. ^ Clinton & Gore, supra
  3. ^ See Julia M. Fromholz, The European Union Data Privacy Directive, 15 Berkeley Tech. L.J. 471, 472 (2000); Dean William Harvey & Amy White, The Impact of Computer Security Regulation on American Companies, 8 Tex. Wesleyan L. Rev. 505 (2002); Kamaal Zaidi, Harmonizing U.S.-EU Online Privacy Law: Toward a U.S. Comprehensive Regime For the Protection of Personal Data, 12 Mich.St. J. Intâl L. 169 (2003).
  4. ^ Fromholz, supra
  5. ^ U.S. Const. amend. I
  6. ^ See, for example, Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973)
  7. ^ See Ryan Moshell, â¦And Then There was one: The Outlook for a Self-Regulatory United States Amidst a Global Trend Toward Comprehensive Data Protection, 37 Tex. Tech. L. Rev. 357, 358; See also The History of Place, Kristallnacht, available at http://www.historyplace.com/worldwar2/timeline/knacht-bio.htm & Jason Kotzker, The Great Cookie Caper: Internet Privacy and Target Marketing at Home and Abroad, 15 St. Thomas L. Rev. 727, 748 (2003)
  8. ^ Id.
  9. ^ See Marsha Cope Huie, Stephen F. Laribee & Stephen D. Hogan, The Right to Privacy and Person Data: The EU Prods the U.S. and Controversy Continues, 9 Tulsa J. Comp. & Int'l L. 391, 441 (2002)
  10. ^ Id. at footnote 4.
  11. ^ See The Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development, Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data, available at http://www.oecd.org/document/18/0,2340,en_2649_34255_1815186_1_1_1_1,00.html (last modified Jan. 5, 1999)
  12. ^ Anna Shimanek, Note, Do you Want Milk with those Cookies?: Complying with Safe Harbor Privacy Principles, 26 Iowa J. Corp. L. 455, 462-463 (2001)
  13. ^ Id. at 463
  14. ^ Id.
  15. ^ a b A divided Europe wants to protect its personal data wanted by the US, Rue 89, 4 March 2008 (English)
  16. ^ See [1].
  17. ^ Brussels attacks new US security demands, European Observer. See also Statewatch newsletter February 2008
  18. ^ Statewatch, March 2008

## [edit] External links

  * EU data protection page. The European Commission provides elaborate information on its website. The following subjects are covered: 
    * Legislative documents
    * Transposition and implementation of Directive 95/46/EC
    * European Data Protection Supervisor
    * National Data Protection Commissioners
    * Art. 29 Data protection Working Party
    * Adequacy of protection in third countries and model contracts for the transfer of personal data to third countries
  * 2000/520/EC: Commission Decision of 26 July 2000 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (Safe harbor principle)
  * Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 (Directive on privacy and electronic communications)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_Protection_Directive"

Categories: Data privacy | Privacy law | European Union directives

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 14:19 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



