
# David Cheriton

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

David R. Cheriton

David R. Cheriton is a Canadian-born computer science professor at Stanford
University and a billionaire as a result of his investments in technology
companies. He received his Masters and PhD degrees from the University of
Waterloo in 1974 and 1978, respectively, and spent three years as an Assistant
Professor at the University of British Columbia before moving to Stanford.

## Contents

  * 1 Research
  * 2 Industry Work
  * 3 Awards and Honours
  * 4 Gift to the University of Waterloo
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Research

Cheriton leads the Distributed Systems Group at Stanford University.

One of Cheriton's notable publications, with Dale Skeen, is the paper
"Understanding the limits of causally and totally ordered communication",
presented at the ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles in 1993.[1]

## [edit] Industry Work

Cheriton co-founded Granite Systems with Andy Bechtolsheim, a company
developing gigabit Ethernet products, acquired by Cisco Systems in 1996. He
was also a co-founder, in 2001, of Bechtolsheim's next startup company,
Kealia,[2] which was acquired by Sun Microsystems in 2004. Cheriton is also
credited for connecting Stanford students Sergey Brin and Larry Page with
venture capitalists at Kleiner Perkins, thus becoming one of the early
investors that helped get Google off the ground. Recently, David Cheriton has
been involved with Arastra (now Arista Networks), a maker of 10-Gigabit
Ethernet switches. Cheriton is also an investor in and advisory board member
for frontline data warehouse company Aster Data Systems
(http://www.asterdata.com/about/advisory.php) and Zunavision
(http://www.zunavision.com), an in-video advertising startup founded at
Stanford.

## [edit] Awards and Honours

In 2003, Cheriton was presented with the SIGCOMM Lifetime Achievement award by
the ACM "for his contributions in data networking and systems, and for his
keen talent for questioning the assumptions behind all our work." [3]

## [edit] Gift to the University of Waterloo

On November 18, 2005, the University of Waterloo announced that Cheriton had
donated $25 million to support graduate studies and research in its School of
Computer Science. In recognition of his contribution, the school was renamed
the "David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science."

## [edit] References

  1. ^ David R. Cheriton and Dale Skeen. ""Understanding the limits of causally and totally ordered communication"". http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=168623.
  2. ^ CNET News.com. ""Cisco's Brain Drain Continues (12DEC2003)"". http://news.com.com/Ciscos+brain+drain+continues/2100-1036_3-5126160.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-14.
  3. ^ ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communications. ""SIGCOMM Awards"". http://www.sigcomm.org/awards.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-26.

## [edit] External links

  * Stanford University Distributed Systems Group
  * podcast with David Cheriton

<IMG> This biography of a Canadian academic is a stub. You can help Wikipedia
by expanding it.  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Cheriton"

Categories: Living people | Year of birth missing (living people) | Canadian
billionaires | Stanford University faculty | University of Waterloo alumni |
Canadian academic biography stubs

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * æ¥æ¬èª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 February 2009, at 22:01 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



