
# Likert scale

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

A Likert scale (pronunciation in the field of social science varies between
/ËlÉªkÉrt/ 'lick-urt' and /ËlÐ°ÉªkÉrt/ 'lie-kurt'; the man for whom the
scale is named used the former[1]) is a psychometric scale commonly used in
questionnaires, and is the most widely used scale in survey research. When
responding to a Likert questionnaire item, respondents specify their level of
agreement to a statement. The scale is named after Rensis Likert, who
published a report describing its use.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Sample question presented using a five-point Likert item
  * 2 Scoring and analysis
  * 3 Level of measurement
  * 4 Rasch model
  * 5 Pronunciation
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Sample question presented using a five-point Likert item

An important distinction must be made between a Likert Scale and a Likert
item. The Likert Scale is the sum of responses on several Likert items.
Because Likert items are often accompanied by a visual analog scale (e.g., a
horizontal line, on which a subject indicates his or her response by circling
or checking tick-marks), the items are sometimes called scales themselves.
This is the source of much confusion; it is better, therefore, to reserve the
word 'Likert scale' to apply to the summated scale, and 'Likert item' to refer
to an individual item.

A Likert item is simply a statement which the respondent is asked to evaluate
according to any kind of subjective or objective criteria; generally the level
of agreement or disagreement is measured. Often five ordered response levels
are used, although many psychometricians advocate using seven or nine levels;
a recent empirical study[3] found that data from 5-level, 7-level and 10-level
items showed very similar characteristics in terms of mean, variance, skewness
and kurtosis after a simple transformation was applied.

The format of a typical five-level Likert item is::

  1. Strongly disagree
  2. Disagree
  3. Neither agree or disagree
  4. Agree
  5. Strongly Agree

Likert scaling is a bipolar scaling method, measuring either positive or
negative response to a statement. Sometimes a four-point scale is used; this
is a forced choice method since the middle option of "Neither agree nor
disagree" is not available.

Likert scales may be subject to distortion from several causes. Respondents
may avoid using extreme response categories (central tendency bias); agree
with statements as presented (acquiescence bias); or try to portray themselves
or their organization in a more favorable light (social desirability bias).
Designing a scale with balanced keying (an equal number of positive and
negative statements) can obviate the problem of acquiescence bias, since
acquiescence on positively keyed items will balance acquiescence on negatively
keyed items, but central tendency and social desirability are somewhat more
problematic.

## [edit] Scoring and analysis

After the questionnaire is completed, each item may be analyzed separately or
in some cases item responses may be summed to create a score for a group of
items. Hence, Likert scales are often called summative scales.

Whether individual Likert items can be considered as interval-level data, or
whether they should be considered merely ordered-categorical data is the
subject of disagreement. Many regard such items only as ordinal data, because,
especially when using only five levels, one cannot assume that respondents
perceive all pairs of adjacent levels as equidistant. On the other hand, often
(as in the example above) the wording of response levels clearly implies a
symmetry of response levels about a middle category; at the very least, such
an item would fall between ordinal- and interval-level measurement; to treat
it as merely ordinal would lose information. Further, if the item is
accompanied by a visual analog scale, where equal spacing of response levels
is clearly indicated, the argument for treating it as interval-level data is
even stronger.

When treated as ordinal data, Likert responses can be collated into bar
charts, central tendency summarised by the median or the mode (but some would
say not the mean), dispersion summarised by the range across quartiles (but
some would say not the standard deviation), or analyzed using non-parametric
tests, e.g. Chi-square test, Mann-Whitney test, Wilcoxon signed-rank test, or
Kruskal-Wallis test.[4]. Parametric analysis of ordinary averages of Likert
scale data is also justifiable by the Central Limit Theorem, although some
would disagree that ordinary averages should be used for Likert scale data.

Responses to several Likert questions may be summed, providing that all
questions use the same Likert scale and that the scale is a defendable
approximation to an interval scale, in which case they may be treated as
interval data measuring a latent variable. If the summed responses fulfils
these assumptions, parametric statistical tests such as the analysis of
variance can be applied. These can be applied only when the components are
more than 5.[Clarify: More than 5 Likert questions or Likert questions of more
than 5 levels]

Data from Likert scales are sometimes reduced to the nominal level by
combining all agree and disagree responses into two categories of "accept" and
"reject". The Chi-Square, Cochran Q, or McNemar-Test are common statistical
procedures used after this transformation.

Consensus based assessment (CBA) can be used to create an objective standard
for Likert scales in domains where no generally accepted standard or objective
standard exists. Consensus based assessment (CBA) can be used to refine or
even validate generally accepted standards.

## [edit] Level of measurement

The five response categories are often believed to represent an Interval level
of measurement. But this can only be the case if the intervals between the
scale points correspond to empirical observations in a metric sense. In fact,
there may also appear phenomena which even question the ordinal scale level.
For example, in a set of items A,B,C rated with a Likert scale circular
relations like A>B, B>C and C>A can appear. This violates the axiom of
transitivity for the ordinal scale.

## [edit] Rasch model

Likert scale data can, in principle, be used as a basis for obtaining interval
level estimates on a continuum by applying the polytomous Rasch model, when
data can be obtained that fit this model. In addition, the polytomous Rasch
model permits testing of the hypothesis that the statements reflect increasing
levels of an attitude or trait, as intended. For example, application of the
model often indicates that the neutral category does not represent a level of
attitude or trait between the disagree and agree categories.

Again, not every set of Likert scaled items can be used for Rasch measurement.
The data has to be thoroughly checked to fulfill the strict formal axioms of
the model.

## [edit] Pronunciation

Rensis Likert, the developer of the scale pronounced his name 'lick-urt' with
a short "i" sound.[5][6] It has been claimed that Likert's name "is among the
most mispronounced in [the] field."[7] Although many people use the long "i"
variant ('lie-kurt'), those who attempt to stay true to Dr. Likert's
pronunciation use the short "i" pronunciation.

## [edit] See also

  * Analog scale
  * Bogardus Social Distance Scale
  * Consensus based assessment (CBA)
  * Diamond of opposites
  * Discan scale
  * F-scale
  * Guttman scale
  * Ipsative
  * Mokken scale
  * Phrase completion scales
  * Rating scale
  * Rating sites
  * Reverse coding
  * Rosenberg self esteem scale
  * Semantic differential
  * Thurstone scale
  * Voting system

## [edit] References

  1. ^ I have always restricted the use
  2. ^ Likert, Rensis (1932), "A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes", Archives of Psychology 140: 1â55
  3. ^ Dawes, John (2008), "Do Data Characteristics Change According to the number of scale points used? An experiment using 5-point, 7-point and 10-point scales," International Journal of Market Research, 50 (1), 61-77.
  4. ^ So You Want to Use a Likert Scale? from the Learning Technology Dissemination Initiative
  5. ^ Babbie, Earl R. (2005). The Basics of Social Research. Thomson Wadsworth. pp. 174\. ISBN 0534630367.
  6. ^ Meyers, Lawrence S.; Anthony Guarino, Glenn Gamst (2005). Applied Multivariate Research: Design and Interpretation. Sage Publications Inc. pp. 20\. ISBN 1412904129.
  7. ^ Latham, Gary P. (2006). Work Motivation: History, Theory, Research, And Practice. Sage Publications Inc. pp. 15\. ISBN 0761920188.

## [edit] External links

  * Trochim, William M. The Research Methods Knowledge Base, 2nd Edition. Internet WWW page, at URL: http://www.socialresearchmethods.net/kb/scallik.php (version current as of October 20, 2006).
  * Likert Scales: Dispelling the Confusion \- John Uebersax

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Likert_scale"

Categories: Psychometrics | Educational psychology research methods | Market
research

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 26 March 2009, at 18:54.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



