
# Encryption

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Encrypt" redirects here. For the film, see Encrypt (film).

This article is about algorithms for encryption and decryption. For an
overview of cryptographic technology in general, see Cryptography.

In cryptography, encryption is the process of transforming information
(referred to as plaintext) using an algorithm (called cipher) to make it
unreadable to anyone except those possessing special knowledge, usually
referred to as a key. The result of the process is encrypted information (in
cryptography, referred to as ciphertext). In many contexts, the word
encryption also implicitly refers to the reverse process, decryption (e.g.
âsoftware for encryptionâ can typically also perform decryption), to make
the encrypted information readable again (i.e. to make it unencrypted).

Encryption has long been used by militaries and governments to facilitate
secret communication. Encryption is now commonly used in protecting
information within many kinds of civilian systems. For example, in 2007 the
U.S. government reported that 71% of companies surveyed utilized encryption
for some of their data in transit.[1] Encryption can be used to protect data
"at rest", such as files on computers and storage devices (e.g. USB flash
drives). In recent years there have been numerous reports of confidential data
such as customers' personal records being exposed through loss or theft of
laptops or backup drives. Encrypting such files at rest helps protect them
should physical security measures fail. Digital rights management systems
which prevent unauthorized use or reproduction of copyrighted material and
protect software against reverse engineering (see also copy protection)are
another somewhat different example of using encryption on data at rest.

Encryption is also used to protect data in transit, for example data being
transferred via networks (e.g. the Internet, e-commerce), mobile telephones,
wireless microphones, wireless intercom systems, Bluetooth devices and bank
automatic teller machines. There have also been numerous reports of data in
transit being intercepted in recent years [2]. Encrypting data in transit also
helps to secure it as it is often difficult to physically secure all access to
networks. Encryption, by itself, can protect the confidentiality of messages,
but other techniques are still needed to protect the integrity and
authenticity of a message; for example, verification of a message
authentication code (MAC) or a digital signature. Standards and cryptographic
software and hardware to perform encryption are widely available, but
successfully using encryption to ensure security may be a challenging problem.
A single slip-up in system design or execution can allow successful attacks.
Sometimes an adversary can obtain unencrypted information without directly
undoing the encryption. See, e.g., traffic analysis, TEMPEST, or Trojan horse.

One of the earliest public key encryption applications was called Pretty Good
Privacy (PGP), according to Paul Rubens. It was written in 1991 by Phil
Zimmermann and was bought by Network Associates in 1997 and is now called PGP
Corporation.

There are a number of reasons why an encryption product may not be suitable in
all cases. First e-mail must be digitally signed at the point it was created
to provide non-repudiation for some legal purposes, otherwise the sender could
argue that it was tampered with after it left their computer but before it was
encrypted at a gateway according to Paul. An encryption product may also not
be practical when mobile users need to send e-mail from outside the corporate
network.* [3]

## [edit] See also

  * Cryptography
  * Cold boot attack
  * Encryption software

  * Cipher
  * Key
  * Famous ciphertexts

<IMG> Cryptography portal  
  * Disk encryption
  * Secure USB drive
  * Secure Network Communications

  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ 2008 CSI Computer Crime and Security Survey, by Robert Richardson, p19
  2. ^ Fiber Optic Networks Vulnerable to Attack, Information Security Magazine, November 15, 2006, Sandra Kay Miller
  3. ^ [1]

  * Helen FouchÃ© Gaines, âCryptanalysisâ, 1939, Dover. ISBN 0-486-20097-3
  * David Kahn, The Codebreakers - The Story of Secret Writing (ISBN 0-684-83130-9) (1967)
  * Abraham Sinkov, Elementary Cryptanalysis: A Mathematical Approach, Mathematical Association of America, 1966. ISBN 0-88385-622-0

## [edit] External links

  * [2]

<IMG>

Look up encryption in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

  * SecurityDocs Resource for encryption whitepapers
  * Accumulative archive of various cryptography mailing lists. Includes Cryptography list at metzdowd and SecurityFocus Crypto list.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Cryptography  
History of cryptography Â· Cryptanalysis Â· Cryptography portal Â· Topics in
cryptography  
Symmetric-key algorithm Â· Block cipher Â· Stream cipher Â· Public-key
cryptography Â· Cryptographic hash function Â· Message authentication code Â·
Random numbers Â· Steganography  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encryption"

Categories: Cryptography

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Bosanski
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 23:58.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



