
# Telemetry

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article
or discuss these issues on the talk page.

  * It is missing citations or footnotes. Please help improve it by adding inline citations. Tagged since January 2009.  

  * It needs additional references or sources for verification. Tagged since January 2009.  

  * Its introduction provides insufficient context for those unfamiliar with the subject. Tagged since January 2009.  

  * It may require general cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Tagged since January 2009.  

  * It is incomplete and may require expansion or cleanup. Tagged since January 2009.  

  
Telemetry (synonymous with telematics) is a technology that allows the remote
measurement and reporting of information of interest to the system designer or
operator. The word is derived from Greek roots tele = remote, and metron =
measure. Systems that need instructions and data sent to them in order to
operate require the counterpart of telemetry, telecommand.

## Contents

  * 1 Explanation
  * 2 Applications
    * 2.1 Agriculture
    * 2.2 Water management
    * 2.3 Defense, space and resource exploration systems
    * 2.4 Rocketry
    * 2.5 Enemy intelligence
    * 2.6 Resource distribution
    * 2.7 Motor racing
    * 2.8 Medicine
    * 2.9 Fisheries and Wildlife Research and Management
    * 2.10 Retail businesses
    * 2.11 Law enforcement
  * 3 International standards
  * 4 See also
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Explanation

Telemetry typically refers to wireless communications (i.e. using a radio
system to implement the data link), but can also refer to data transferred
over other media, such as a telephone or computer network or via an optical
link or when making a robot it can be over a wire.

## [edit] Applications

### [edit] Agriculture

Most activities related to healthy crops and good yields depend on the timely
availability of weather and soil data. Therefore wireless weather stations
play a major role in disease prevention and precision irrigation. These
stations transmit back to a base station the major parameters needed for good
decisions: air temperature and relative humidity, precipitation and leaf
wetness data (needed for disease prediction models), solar radiation and wind
speed (needed to calculate evapotranspiration), and sometimes also soil
moisture, crucial for proper irrigation decisions in order to understand the
progress of water into the soil and towards the roots.

Because local micro-climates can vary significantly, such data needs to come
from right within the crop. Monitoring stations usually transmit data back by
terrestrial radio though occasionally satellite systems are used. Solar power
is often employed to make the station independent from local infrastructure.

### [edit] Water management

Telemetry has become indispensable for water management applications,
including water quality and stream gauging functions. Major applications
include AMR (automatic meter reading), groundwater monitoring, leak detection
in distribution pipelines and equipment surveillance. Having data available in
almost real time allows quick reactions to occurrences in the field.

### [edit] Defense, space and resource exploration systems

Telemetry is an enabling technology for large complex systems such as
missiles, RPVs, spacecraft, oil rigs and chemical plants because it allows
automatic monitoring, alerting, and record-keeping necessary for safe,
efficient operations. Space agencies such as NASA, ESA, and other agencies use
telemetry/telecommand systems to collect data from operating spacecraft and
satellites.

Telemetry is vital in the development phase of missiles, satellites and
aircraft because the system might be destroyed after/during the test.
Engineers need critical system parameters in order to analyze (and improve)
the performance of the system. Without telemetry, these data would often be
unavailable.

### [edit] Rocketry

In rocketry, telemetry equipment forms an integral part of the rocket range
assets used to monitor the progress of a rocket launch.

### [edit] Enemy intelligence

Telemetry was a vital source of intelligence for the US and UK when Soviet
missiles were tested. For this purpose, the US operated a listening post in
Iran. Eventually, the Soviets discovered this kind of US intelligence
gathering and encrypted their telemetry signals of missile tests. Telemetry
was a vital source for the Soviets who would operate listening ships in
Cardigan Bay to eavesdrop on the UK missile tests carried out there.

### [edit] Resource distribution

Many resources need to be distributed over wide areas. Telemetry is essential
in these cases, since it allows the system to channel resources to where they
are needed.

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009)  
### [edit] Motor racing

Telemetry has been a key factor in modern motor racing. Engineers are able to
interpret the vast amount of data collected during a test or race, and use
that to properly tune the car for optimum performance. Systems used in some
series, namely Formula One, have become advanced to the point where the
potential lap time of the car can be calculated and this is what the driver is
expected to meet. Some examples of useful measurements on a race car include
accelerations (G forces) in 3 axes, temperature readings, wheel speed, and the
displacement of the suspension. In Formula 1, the driver inputs are also
recorded so that the team can assess driver performance and, in the case of an
accident, the FIA can determine or rule out driver error as a possible cause.

In addition, there exist some series where "two way" telemetry is allowed. Two
way telemetry suggests that engineers have the ability to update calibrations
on the car in real time, possibly while it is out on the track. In Formula 1,
two-way telemetry surfaced in the early nineties from TAG electronics, and
consisted of a message display on the dashboard which the team could update.
Its development continued until May 2001, at which point it was first allowed
on the cars. By 2002 the teams were able to change engine mapping and
deactivate particular engine sensors from the pits while the car was on
track.[citation needed] For the 2003 season, the FIA banned two-way telemetry
from Formula 1,[citation needed] however the technology still exists and could
eventually find its way into other forms of racing or road cars.

In addition to that telemetry has also been applied to the use of Yacht
racing.[clarification needed For what purpose? By whom?] The technology was
applied to the Oracle's USA-76.[citation needed]

### [edit] Medicine

Telemetry also is used for patients (biotelemetry) who are at risk of abnormal
heart activity, generally in a coronary care unit. Such patients are outfitted
with measuring, recording and transmitting devices. A data log can be useful
in diagnosis of the patient's condition by doctors. An alerting function can
alert nurses if the patient is suffering from an acute or dangerous condition.

Also a system that is available in medical-surgical nursing in order to
monitor a condition where heart condition may be ruled out. Or to monitor a
response to arrhythmic medications such as Digoxin.

### [edit] Fisheries and Wildlife Research and Management

<IMG>

<IMG>

Common Seal with a transceiver on his back

Telemetry is now being used to study wildlife, and has been particularly
useful for monitoring threatened species at the individual level. Animals
under study may be fitted with instrumentation ranging from simple tags to
cameras, GPS packages and transceivers to provide position and other basic
information to scientists and stewards.

Telemetry is used in hydroacoustic assessments for fish which have
traditionally employed mobile surveys from boats to evaluate fish biomass and
spatial distributions. Conversely, fixed-location techniques use stationary
transducers to monitor passing fish. While the first serious attempts to
quantify fish biomass were conducted in the 1960s, major advances in equipment
and techniques took place at hydropower dams in the 1980âs. Some evaluations
monitored fish passage 24 hours a day for over a year, producing estimates of
fish entrainment rates, fish sizes, and spatial and temporal distributions.

In the 1970âs, the dual-beam technique was invented, permitting direct
estimation of fish size in-situ via its target strength. The first portable
split-beam hydroacoustic system was developed by HTI in 1991, and provided
more accurate and less variable estimates of fish target strength than the
dual-beam method. It also permitted tracking of fish in 3D, giving each
fishâs swimming path and absolute direction of movement. This feature proved
important for evaluations of entrained fish in water diversions as well as for
studies of migratory fish in rivers. In the last 35 years, tens of thousands
of mobile and fixed-location hydroacoustic evaluations have been conducted
worldwide. To view examples there are online demos available.

### [edit] Retail businesses

At a 2005 workshop in Las Vegas, a seminar noted the introduction of telemetry
equipment that would allow vending machines to communicate sales and inventory
data to a route truck or to a headquarters[citation needed]. This data could
be used for a variety of purposes, such as eliminating the need for the driver
to make a first trip to see what items need to be restocked before bringing
the inventory inside.

Retailers are also beginning to make use of RFID tags to track inventory and
prevent shoplifting. Most of these tags passively respond to RFID readers
(e.g. at the cashier), but active RFID tags are available that periodically
transmit telemetry to a base station.

### [edit] Law enforcement

Telemetry hardware is useful for tracking persons and property in law
enforcement. An ankle collar worn by convicts on probation can warn
authorities if a person violates the terms of his or her parole, such as by
straying from authorized boundaries or visiting an unauthorized location.
Telemetry equipment has also given rise to the concept of bait cars, where law
enforcement can rig a car with cameras and tracking equipment and leave it
somewhere they expect it to be stolen. When stolen, the telemetry equipment
reports the location of the vehicle, and gives law enforcement the ability to
deactivate the engine and lock the doors once it is intercepted.

## [edit] International standards

As in other telecommunications fields, international standards exist for
telemetry equipment and software. CCSDS and IRIG are such standards.

## [edit] See also

  * Telematics
  * Telecommand
  * Data Acquisition System
  * automatic data processing.
  * instrumentation
  * IRIG
  * Machine to Machine (M2M)
  * reconnaissance satellites, tapping of communications routing or switching centers (e.g. Echelon)
  * remote sensing
  * RTU
  * SCADA
  * Wireless sensor network

## [edit] External links

  * International Foundation for Telemetry
  * IRIG 106 â Digital telemetry standard
  * Zarya - satellite tracking frequencies
  * The European Society of Telemetering

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telemetry"

Categories: Telemetry | Communication | Measurement | Radio frequency
propagation | Wireless locating

Hidden categories: Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles lacking reliable references from
January 2009 | Wikipedia articles needing context | Cleanup from January 2009
| All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from
January 2009 | Articles needing additional references from January 2009 |
Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 26 March 2009, at 01:13.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



