
# Semantic desktop

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

In computer science, the Semantic Desktop is a collective term for ideas
related to changing a computer's user interface and data handling capabilities
so that data is more easily shared between different applications or tasks and
so that data that once could not be automatically processed by a computer
could be. It also encompasses some ideas about being able to automatically
share information between different people. This concept is very much related
to the Semantic Web but is distinct insofar its main concern is the personal
use of information.

## Contents

  * 1 General description
  * 2 Different interpretations of the semantic desktop
  * 3 Relationship with the Semantic Web
  * 4 References
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links
    * 6.1 Open Source Implementations

  
## [edit] General description

The vision of the semantic desktop can be considered as a response to the
perceived problems of existing user interfaces. Firstly computers cannot get a
great deal of information about the content of files. For example suppose one
downloads a document by a particular author on a particular subject - though
the document will likely clearly indicate its subject, author, source and
possibly copyright information there is no way for the computer to obtain this
information or process it. This means the computer cannot search, filter or
otherwise act upon the information as effectively as it otherwise could. This
is very much the problem that the Semantic Web is concerned with.

Secondly there is the problem that information stored on a computer can only
be accessed or sorted in a way related to its format. For example e-mails are
stored separately to files, and both have nothing to do with tasks, notes and
planned activities that may be stored in a calendar program, whilst contacts
might be stored in another program, however all these forms of information
might simultaneously be relevant and necessary for a particular task. Further
even if data is all stored as part of the file system it is often accessed
with different applications, even very similar formats may need to be accessed
with different programs - for example a PDF, PostScript, Microsoft Word and
ASCII files are all opened in different programs despite being essentially the
same.

Related to this a user will often access a lot of data for the Internet which
is segregated from the data stored locally on the computer, being accessed
through a browser or other programs. As well as accessed data a user has to
share data, often through e-mail or separate file transfer programs.

The semantic desktop is an attempt to solve some or all of these problem by
extending the operating system's capabilities to be able to handle all data
using Semantic Web technologies. Based on this data integration, improved user
interfaces (or plugins to existing applications) can give the user an
integrated view on stored knowledge.

A definition of Semantic Desktop was given (Sauermann et al 2005):

> A Semantic Desktop is a device in which an individual stores all her digital
information like documents, multimedia and messages. These are interpreted as
Semantic Web resources, each is identified by a Uniform Resource Identifier
(URI) and all data is accessible and queryable as RDF graph. Resources from
the web can be stored and authored content can be shared with others.
Ontologies allow the user to express personal mental models and form the
semantic glue interconnecting information and systems. Applications respect
this and store, read and communicate via ontologies and Semantic Web
protocols. The Semantic Desktop is an enlarged supplement to the userâs
memory.

## [edit] Different interpretations of the semantic desktop

There are various interpretations of the semantic desktop. At its most limited
it might be interpreted as adding mechanisms for relating machine readable
metadata to files. In a more extreme way it could be viewed as a complete
replacement to existing user interfaces, which unifies all forms of data and
provides a consistent single interface. There are many degrees between these
two depending on which of the above problems are being dealt with.

## [edit] Relationship with the Semantic Web

The Semantic Web is mainly concerned with making machine readable metadata to
enable computers to process shared information, and the creation of formats
and standards related to this. As such the aims of allowing more of a user's
data to be processed by a computer and allowing data to more easily be shared
could be considered as a subset of those of the semantic web, but extended to
a user's local computer, rather than just files stored on the internet.

However the aims of creating a unified interface and allowing data to be
accessed in a format independent way are not really the concerns of the
Semantic Web.

In practice most projects related to the semantic desktop make use of Semantic
Web protocols for storing their data. In particular RDF's concepts are used,
and the format itself is used.

## [edit] References

  * Stefan Decker, Martin Frank: The Social Semantic Desktop. DERI Technology Report, 2004.
  * Stefan Decker, Martin Frank: The Networked Semantic Desktop. WWW Workshop on Application Design, Development and Implementation Issues in the Semantic Web 2004.
  * Leo Sauermann, Ansgar Bernardi, Andreas Dengel:Overview and Outlook on the Semantic Desktop. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on The Semantic Desktop at the ISWC 2005 Conference.

## [edit] See also

  * Semantic Web
  * Dublin Core, a set of general terms for annotating resources with metadata
  * Personal Information Manager
  * Knowledge Management
  * Desktop search
  * Concept maps
  * Mind maps
  * NEPOMUK, a specification for a social semantic desktop framework
  * Haystack, an information client developed at the MIT
  * Chandler, a personal information manager
  * WinFS, a data storage and management system based on relational databases, developed by Microsoft

  

## [edit] External links

  * SemanticDesktop.org

### [edit] Open Source Implementations

  * Semantic Desktop with KDE, NEPOMUK-based social semantic desktop is integrated into KDE 4 desktop environment for Linux
  * Gnowsis, a reference implementation of NEPOMUK
  * Deepamehta, a software platform for knowledge management
  * Tracker, a metadata database and file search
  * Iris, a semantic desktop application framework

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semantic_desktop"

Categories: Buzzwords | Semantic desktop

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Deutsch
  * æ¥æ¬èª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 January 2009, at 19:39 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



