
# OpenStreetMap

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

OpenStreetMap <IMG>  
<IMG>  
OpenStreetMap of Cambridge  
URL http://www.openstreetmap.org  
Slogan The Free Wiki World Map  
Commercial? No  
Type of site Collaborative mapping  
Registration required for contributors  
Owner OpenStreetMap Foundation  
Created by Steve Coast  
Launched July 1, 2004(2004-07-01)  
OpenStreetMap (OSM) is a collaborative project to create a free editable map
of the world. The maps are created using data from portable GPS devices,
aerial photography and other free sources. Both rendered images and the vector
dataset are available for download under a Creative Commons Attribution-
ShareAlike 2.0 licence.[1] Registered users can upload GPS track logs and edit
the vector data using the given editing tools. OpenStreetMap was inspired by
sites such as Wikipedia â the map display features a prominent 'Edit' tab
and a full revision history is maintained.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Map production
    * 2.1 Technique
    * 2.2 Structured ground surveys
    * 2.3 Government data sources
    * 2.4 Commercial data sources
  * 3 Licensing
    * 3.1 The OpenStreetMap database
    * 3.2 Input data
    * 3.3 Software
  * 4 Usage
    * 4.1 On-line raster maps
    * 4.2 Flickr
    * 4.3 Map data
  * 5 Software
    * 5.1 Map rendering and presentation
    * 5.2 Map data collection
    * 5.3 Map data editing
    * 5.4 Routing
  * 6 Data format
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] History

OpenStreetMap (OSM) was founded in July 2004 by Steve Coast. In April 2006, a
foundation was established with the aim of encouraging the growth, development
and distribution of free geospatial data and providing geospatial data for
anybody to use and share. In December 2006 Yahoo confirmed that OpenStreetMap
could use their aerial photography as a backdrop for map production.[2]

In April 2007 Automotive Navigation Data donated a complete road dataset for
the Netherlands and trunk road data for India and China to the project[3] and
by July 2007, when the first OSM international The State of the Map conference
was held there were 9,000 registered users. Sponsors of the event included
Google, Yahoo and Multimap. In August 2007 an independent project,
OpenAerialMap, was launched, to hold a database of aerial photography
available on open licensing[4] and in October 2007 OpenStreetMap completed the
import of a US Census TIGER road dataset.[5] In December Oxford University
became the first major organisation to use OpenStreetMap data on their main
website.[6]

In January 2008 functionality was made available to download map data into a
GPS unit for use by cyclists.[7] In February 2008 a series of workshops were
held in India.[8] In March two founders of OpenStreetMap announced that they
have received venture capital funding of 2.4m euros for Cloud Made, a
commercial company that will use OpenStreetMap data.[9]

By August 2008, shortly after the second The State of the Map conference was
held, there were over 50,000 registered users with over 5,000 active
contributors.[10] In March 2009, 100,000 users were surpassed.[11]

## [edit] Map production

<IMG>

<IMG>

Recording of a GPS trace.

### [edit] Technique

The initial map data was all built from scratch by volunteers performing
systematic ground surveys using a handheld GPS unit and a notebook or a voice
recorder, data which was then entered into the OpenStreetMap database from a
computer.

More recently the availability of aerial photography and other data sources
from commercial and government sources has greatly increased the speed of this
work and has allowed land-use data to be collected more accurately.

When large datasets are available a technical team will manage the conversion
and import of the data.

### [edit] Structured ground surveys

<IMG>

<IMG>

Raw GPS data (tracklogs) for Hedge End

Ground surveys are performed by a volunteer, on foot, bicycle or in a car,
although a bicycle is the mode of choice for many volunteers mapping urban
areas, using a GPS unit, and some combination of notebook, voice recorder and
digital camera and questioning of passers-by. This data is then entered into
the database. Some committed contributors are systematically mapping whole
towns over a period of time. Mapping Parties are organised to bring a number
of mappers together to map a particular area for an evening or a weekend to
intensively map an area.

In addition to structured surveys, a large number of smaller edits are made by
contributors to correct errors or add features.

### [edit] Government data sources

Some government agencies have released official data on appropriate licences,
much of this data has come from the United States, where the federal
government cannot copyright such data.

  * Landsat 7 satellite imagery
  * Prototype Global Shorelines (PGS)
  * TIGER data of the United States

Various authorities have also made more local detailed aerial photography
available on suitable licences through OpenAerialMap.

The UK Ordnance Survey is legally a Trading Fund and as such is required to
earn money from selling its data and is not open to contributing data to the
project.[12] Consideration is however currently being given to changing the
structure of the organisation to make its data more available.[13] In 2006 The
Guardian launched a campaign 'Free our data' to argue to free up government
data including mapping data[14]. The Government's Shareholder Executive will
report on its latest review of the Trading Funds in the 2008 Pre-Budget
Report, due in the autumn.

Out-of-copyright maps can be good source of information about features which
don't change frequently. Copyright periods vary, but in the UK 'Crown
copyright' expires after 50 years and hence Ordnance Survey maps until the
1950s can legally be used. A complete set of UK 1 inch/mile maps from the late
1940s and early 1950s have been collected, scanned and are available online as
a resource for contributors.

### [edit] Commercial data sources

Some commercial companies have donated data to the project on suitable
licenses. Notably, Automotive Navigation Data (AND) who provided a complete
road dataset for Netherlands and details of trunk roads in China and India.

Yahoo! confirmed that OpenStreetMap was able to make use of their vertical
aerial imagery and this photography is now available within the editing
software as an overlay. Contributors can create their vector based maps as a
derived work, released with a free and open license.[15]

## [edit] Licensing

<IMG>

<IMG>

Homepage of OpenStreetMap.org

### [edit] The OpenStreetMap database

OpenStreetMap data is published using a Creative Commons Attribution-Share
Alike 2.0 licence. A new licence is being prepared which is more suitable for
a map dataset.[1]

### [edit] Input data

All data added to the project needs to have a license compatible with the
Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike license. This can include out of
copyright information, public domain or other licenses. All contributors must
register with the project and agree to provide data on a Creative Commons BY-
SA 2.0 licence or determine that the licencing of the source data is suitable.
Increasingly this involves examining licences for government data to establish
if it they are compatible. Use of unfree data is an especially severe problem
for a map, as the only way to prove that no data came from unfree sources
would be to revert the whole area in question to before the addition of the
questionable data.

A subset of contributors have made their contributions available as public
domain.[16]

### [edit] Software

Software used in the production and presentation of OpenStreetMap data is
available from many different projects and each may have their own licencing.
The core software to manage the databases, user interaction and the API are
available under a GNU General Public License.[17]

## [edit] Usage

OpenStreetMap data is available through an increasing number of sites and in
different formats:

### [edit] On-line raster maps

Mapping is available online both on general mapping sites:

  * OpenStreetMap general, cyclists, debugging (Worldwide)
  * FreeMap walkers (parts of the UK)
  * OpenCycleMap cyclists (Worldwide)
  * Yournavigation routing (Worldwide)
  * OpenRouteService routing (Europe)
  * OpenPisteMap skiing (some European and USA resorts)[18]
  * CloudMade general, mobile (Worldwide)
  * OSM Mapper Debugging maps by Ito World Ltd

### [edit] Flickr

Yahoo has started using OpenStreetMap data within its Flickr service for
various cities around the world, including Baghdad, Beijing, Kabul, Sydney and
Tokyo.[19][20][21].

### [edit] Map data

Map data is available for download in a variety of formats and for different
geographical areas:

  * OpenStreetMap osm[22]
  * CloudMade osm, garmin[23]
  * Geofabrik osm, esri[24]

## [edit] Software

### [edit] Map rendering and presentation

<IMG>

<IMG>

OpenStreetMap of Soho, central London

  * Online Ajax-style OpenLayers based slippy map interface. Displaying map tiles rendered by: 
    * Mapnik â C++ opensource map rendering software using on main OSM site
    * Osmarender â XSLT style sheets for generating SVG images from OSM data. Used as part of the Tiles@home distributed map-rendering system for the main OSM site.
  * Desktop 
    * Kosmos â Windows application for rendering maps, with an interactive mode and a local tile server mode.
    * OSMMap â Windows tool for browsing the OSM Maps (using Mapnik and Osmarender)
    * tangoGPS â Open source, linux-based mapping application for use with or without GPS. Suitable for use on many Linux platforms including desktops, the eeePC and phones such as the Openmoko Neo.
    * Prune \- Open source java application for viewing and editing data recorded by GPS. Uses OSM for the map layers.
    * GPSDrive \- Open source, linux/BSD/OS X-based car navigation application.
  * Phone and GPS displays

### [edit] Map data collection

  * GPSBabel â converts tracklogs from one format to another.
  * AFTrack â Symbian 60v3 for Nokia mobile phones, live tracking and routing software, from version 1.03 onwards
  * MyMotion â Windows CE tracking software

### [edit] Map data editing

<IMG>

<IMG>

JOSM - Java-based map editor

  * Potlatch â Online Flash editor
  * JOSM â Desktop Java editor
  * Merkaartor â Desktop Qt editor

### [edit] Routing

  * Gosmore
  * Pyroute
  * OpenRouteService
  * Traveling salesman \- Open source java application working as route-planner and GPS-Navigator using the map-data from OpenStreetMap via LibOSM

## [edit] Data format

OpenStreetMap uses a topological data structure.

  * Nodes are points with a geographic position.
  * Ways are lists of nodes, representing a polyline or polygon.
  * Relations are groups of nodes, ways and other relations which can be assigned certain properties.
  * Tags can be applied to nodes, ways or relations and consist of name=value pairs.

Up to version 0.4 of its protocol, an intermediate element between nodes and
ways (segments) was also used.

The ontology of map features (the meaning of tags) is maintained on a wiki.

## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: OpenStreetMap  
  * Neogeography
  * OpenLayers
  * Wikimapia
  * Placeopedia
  * OpenStreetMap WikiProject
  * Category:OpenStreetMap (Wikimedia commons)
  * Collaborative mapping

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Richard Fairhurst (2008-01-07). "The licence: where we are, where weâre going". OpenGeoData. http://www.opengeodata.org/?p=262. Retrieved on 2008-07-24.
  2. ^ http://www.opengeodata.org/?p=120
  3. ^ http://www.opengeodata.org/?p=223
  4. ^ http://www.opengeodata.org/?p=230
  5. ^ http://www.linux.com/feature/119493?theme=print
  6. ^ http://geothought.blogspot.com/2007/12/oxford-university-using-openstreetmap.html
  7. ^ http://www.systemed.net/blog/entry080113140415.html
  8. ^ openstreetmap:India
  9. ^ http://blog.cloudmade.com/2008/03/17/were-funded/
  10. ^ http://www.opengeodata.org/?p=309
  11. ^ http://www.opengeodata.org/?p=444
  12. ^ http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite/media/features/tradingfund.html
  13. ^ http://www.oft.gov.uk/news/press/2008/78-08
  14. ^ SA Mathieson and Michael Cross (2006-03-23). "Ordnance Survey challenged to open up". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2006/mar/23/epublic.technology. Retrieved on 2009-02-23.
  15. ^ Steve Coast (2006-12-04). "Yahoo! aerial imagery in OSM". OpenGeoData. http://www.opengeodata.org/?p=120. Retrieved on 2008-07-23. [dead link]
  16. ^ "OpenStreetMap Legal FAQ". http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Legal_FAQ. "Several contributors additionally make their code available under different licences"
  17. ^ "OpenStreetMap License". http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/OpenStreetMap_License. "OpenStreetMap software is licensed under the GNU GPL"
  18. ^ openstreetmap:WikiProject Piste Maps
  19. ^ "Around the world and back again". blog-flickr.net. http://blog.flickr.net/en/2008/08/12/around-the-world-and-back-again/. Retrieved on 2008-11-07.
  20. ^ "More cities". blog-flickr.net. http://blog.flickr.net/en/2008/10/30/more-cities/. Retrieved on 2008-11-07.
  21. ^ "Japanese progress in osm. Amazing stuff!". http://thinkwhere.wordpress.com/2008/09/16/japan-osm-progress/.
  22. ^ http://planet.openstreetmap.org/
  23. ^ http://downloads.cloudmade.com/
  24. ^ http://download.geofabrik.de/osm/

## [edit] External links

  * www.openstreetmap.org - Project page
  * Project Wiki
  * OpenAerialMap
  * geo.topf.org online-comparison between Google and OpenStreetMap

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenStreetMap"

Categories: Collaborative mapping | Distributed computing projects | Creative
Commons-licensed works | Open content projects | OpenStreetMap maps | Internet
properties established in 2004 | Web mapping | Web Map Services | Wiki
communities | Maps | 2004 establishments | Free websites | Geographic
information systems

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Kiswahili
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 14:01.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



