
# Bluetooth

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the electronic protocol. For the medieval King of
Denmark, see Harald I of Denmark.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bluetooth logo.

Bluetooth is an open wireless protocol for exchanging data over short
distances from fixed and mobile devices, creating personal area networks
(PANs). It was originally conceived as a wireless alternative to RS232 data
cables. It can connect several devices, overcoming problems of
synchronization.

## Contents

  * 1 Origin of the name
  * 2 Origin of the Bluetooth logo
  * 3 Implementation
  * 4 Uses
    * 4.1 Bluetooth profiles
    * 4.2 List of applications
    * 4.3 Bluetooth IEEE 802.15.1 vs. Wi-Fi IEEE 802.11 in networking
      * 4.3.1 Bluetooth devices
      * 4.3.2 Wi-Fi
  * 5 Computer requirements
    * 5.1 Operating system support
  * 6 Mobile phone requirements
  * 7 Specifications and features
    * 7.1 Bluetooth 1.0 and 1.0B
    * 7.2 Bluetooth 1.1
    * 7.3 Bluetooth 1.2
    * 7.4 Bluetooth 2.0
    * 7.5 Bluetooth 2.1
    * 7.6 Future
      * 7.6.1 Bluetooth low energy
      * 7.6.2 Bluetooth high speed
      * 7.6.3 Bluetooth 3.0 (Seattle)
  * 8 Technical information
    * 8.1 Bluetooth protocol stack
      * 8.1.1 LMP (Link Management Protocol)
      * 8.1.2 L2CAP (Logical Link Control & Adaptation Protocol)
      * 8.1.3 SDP (Service Discovery Protocol)
      * 8.1.4 HCI (Host/Controller Interface)
      * 8.1.5 RFCOMM (Cable replacement protocol)
      * 8.1.6 BNEP (Bluetooth Network Encapsulation Protocol)
      * 8.1.7 AVCTP (Audio/Visual Control Transport Protocol)
      * 8.1.8 AVDTP (Audio/Visual Data Transport Protocol)
      * 8.1.9 Telephone control protocol
      * 8.1.10 Adopted protocols
    * 8.2 Communication and connection
    * 8.3 Baseband Error Correction
    * 8.4 Setting up connections
    * 8.5 Pairing
    * 8.6 Air interface
  * 9 Security
    * 9.1 Overview
    * 9.2 Bluejacking
    * 9.3 History of security concerns
      * 9.3.1 2001
      * 9.3.2 2003
      * 9.3.3 2004
      * 9.3.4 2005
      * 9.3.5 2006
      * 9.3.6 2007
  * 10 Health concerns
  * 11 See also
  * 12 References
  * 13 External links

  
## [edit] Origin of the name

The word Bluetooth is an anglicized version of Old Norse BlÃ¡tÃ¶nn or Danish
BlÃ¥tand, the name of the tenth-century king Harald I of Denmark and Norway,
who united dissonant Scandinavian tribes into a single kingdom. The
implication is that Bluetooth does the same with communications protocols,
uniting them into one universal standard.[1][2][3]

It is possible that the name may have been inspired less by the historical
Harald, than by the loose interpretation of him in The Long Ships by Frans
Gunnar Bengtsson, a Swedish Viking-inspired novel.[citation needed]

## [edit] Origin of the Bluetooth logo

The Bluetooth logo design merges the Germanic runes analogous to the modern
Latin letters H and B: (for Harald Bluetooth) <IMG> (Hagall) and <IMG>
(Berkanan) merged together, forming a bind rune.

## [edit] Implementation

Bluetooth uses a radio technology called frequency-hopping spread spectrum,
which chops up the data being sent and transmits chunks of it on up to 79
frequencies. In its basic mode, the modulation is Gaussian frequency-shift
keying (GFSK). It can achieve a gross data rate of 1 Mb/s. Bluetooth provides
a way to connect and exchange information between devices such as mobile
phones, telephones, laptops, personal computers, printers, Global Positioning
System (GPS) receivers, digital cameras, and video game consoles through a
secure, globally unlicensed Industrial, Scientific and Medical (ISM) 2.4 GHz
short-range radio frequency bandwidth. The Bluetooth specifications are
developed and licensed by the Bluetooth Special Interest Group (SIG). The
Bluetooth SIG consists of companies in the areas of telecommunication,
computing, networking, and consumer electronics.[4]

## [edit] Uses

Bluetooth is a standard and communications protocol primarily designed for low
power consumption, with a short range (power-class-dependent: 1 meter, 10
meters, 100 meters) based on low-cost transceiver microchips in each
device.[5] Bluetooth makes it possible for these devices to communicate with
each other when they are in range. Because the devices use a radio (broadcast)
communications system, they do not have to be in line of sight of each
other.[4]

Class Maximum Permitted Power  
mW (dBm) Range  
(approximate)  
Class 1 100 mW (20 dBm) ~100 meters  
Class 2 2.5 mW (4 dBm) ~10 meters  
Class 3 1 mW (0 dBm) ~1 meter  
In most cases the effective range of class 2 devices is extended if they
connect to a class 1 transceiver, compared to a pure class 2 network. This is
accomplished by the higher sensitivity and transmission power of Class 1
devices.

Version Data Rate  
  
Version 1.2 1 Mbit/s  
Version 2.0 + EDR 3 Mbit/s  
WiMedia Alliance  
(proposed) 53 - 480 Mbit/s  
### [edit] Bluetooth profiles

Main article: Bluetooth profile

In order to use Bluetooth, a device must be compatible with certain Bluetooth
profiles. These define the possible applications and uses of the technology.

### [edit] List of applications

<IMG>

<IMG>

A typical Bluetooth mobile phone headset.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Nokia BH-208 headset internals.

More prevalent applications of Bluetooth include:

  * Wireless control of and communication between a mobile phone and a hands-free headset. This was one of the earliest applications to become popular.
  * Wireless networking between PCs in a confined space and where little bandwidth is required.
  * Wireless communication with PC input and output devices, the most common being the mouse, keyboard and printer.
  * Transfer of files, contact details, calendar appointments, and reminders between devices with OBEX.
  * Replacement of traditional wired serial communications in test equipment, GPS receivers, medical equipment, bar code scanners, and traffic control devices.
  * For controls where infrared was traditionally used.
  * Sending small advertisements from Bluetooth-enabled advertising hoardings to other, discoverable, Bluetooth devices[citation needed].
  * Two seventh-generation game consoles, Nintendo's Wii[6] and Sony's PlayStation 3, use Bluetooth for their respective wireless controllers.
  * Dial-up internet access on personal computers or PDAs using a data-capable mobile phone as a modem.

### [edit] Bluetooth IEEE 802.15.1 vs. Wi-Fi IEEE 802.11 in networking

Bluetooth and Wi-Fi have many applications in today's offices, homes, and on
the move: setting up networks, printing, or transferring presentations and
files from PDAs to computers. Both are versions of unlicensed wireless
technology.

Wi-Fi is intended for resident equipment and its applications. The category of
applications is outlined as WLAN, the wireless local area networks. Wi-Fi is
intended as a replacement for cabling for general local area network access in
work areas.

Bluetooth is intended for non resident equipment and its applications. The
category of applications is outlined as the wireless personal area network
(WPAN). Bluetooth is a replacement for cabling in a variety of personally
carried applications in any ambience.

#### [edit] Bluetooth devices

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Bluetooth USB dongle with a 100m range.

Bluetooth exists in many products, such as telephones, the Wii, PlayStation 3,
Lego Mindstorms NXT and recently in some high definition watches[citation
needed], modems and headsets. The technology is useful when transferring
information between two or more devices that are near each other in low-
bandwidth situations. Bluetooth is commonly used to transfer sound data with
telephones (i.e. with a Bluetooth headset) or byte data with hand-held
computers (transferring files).

Bluetooth protocols simplify the discovery and setup of services between
devices. Bluetooth devices can advertise all of the services they provide.
This makes using services easier because more of the security, network address
and permission configuration can be automated than with many other network
types.

#### [edit] Wi-Fi

Wi-Fi is more like a traditional Ethernet network, and requires configuration
to set up shared resources, transmit files, and to set up audio links (for
example, headsets and hands-free devices). Wi-Fi uses the same radio
frequencies as Bluetooth, but with higher power, resulting in a stronger
connection. Wi-Fi is sometimes called "wireless Ethernet." This description is
accurate, as it also provides an indication of its relative strengths and
weaknesses. Wi-Fi requires more setup but is better suited for operating full-
scale networks; it enables a faster connection, better range from the base
station, and better security than Bluetooth.

## [edit] Computer requirements

<IMG>

<IMG>

A typical Bluetooth USB dongle.

<IMG>

<IMG>

An internal notebook Bluetooth card (14Ã36Ã4 mm).

A personal computer must have a Bluetooth adapter in order to communicate with
other Bluetooth devices (such as mobile phones, mice and keyboards). While
some desktop computers and most recent laptops come with a built-in Bluetooth
adapter, others will require an external one in the form of a dongle.

Unlike its predecessor, IrDA, which requires a separate adapter for each
device, Bluetooth allows multiple devices to communicate with a computer over
a single adapter.

### [edit] Operating system support

For more details on this topic, see Bluetooth stack.

Apple has supported Bluetooth since Mac OS X v10.2 which was released in
2002.[7]

For Microsoft platforms, Windows XP Service Pack 2 and later releases have
native support for Bluetooth. Previous versions required users to install
their Bluetooth adapter's own drivers, which were not directly supported by
Microsoft.[8] Microsoft's own Bluetooth dongles (packaged with their Bluetooth
computer devices) have no external drivers and thus require at least Windows
XP Service Pack 2.

Linux has two popular Bluetooth stacks, BlueZ and Affix. The BlueZ[9] stack is
included with most Linux kernels and was originally developed by Qualcomm. The
Affix stack was developed by Nokia. FreeBSD features Bluetooth support since
its 5.0 release. NetBSD features Bluetooth support since its 4.0 release. Its
Bluetooth stack has been ported to OpenBSD as well.

## [edit] Mobile phone requirements

A mobile phone that is Bluetooth enabled is able to pair with many devices. To
ensure the broadest support of feature functionality together with legacy
device support, the OMTP forum has recently published a recommendations paper,
entitled "Bluetooth Local Connectivity"; see external links below to download
this paper.

This publication recommends two classes, Basic and Advanced, with requirements
that cover imaging, printing, stereo audio and in-car usage.

## [edit] Specifications and features

The Bluetooth specification was developed in 1994 by Jaap Haartsen and Sven
Mattisson, who were working for Ericsson Mobile Platforms in Lund, Sweden.[10]
The specification is based on frequency-hopping spread spectrum technology.

The specifications were formalized by the Bluetooth Special Interest Group
(SIG). The SIG was formally announced on May 20, 1998. Today it has a
membership of over 11,000 companies worldwide. It was established by Ericsson,
IBM, Intel, Toshiba, and Nokia, and later joined by many other companies.

### [edit] Bluetooth 1.0 and 1.0B

Versions 1.0 and 1.0B had many problems, and manufacturers had difficulty
making their products interoperable. Versions 1.0 and 1.0B also included
mandatory Bluetooth hardware device address (BD_ADDR) transmission in the
Connecting process (rendering anonymity impossible at the protocol level),
which was a major setback for certain services planned for use in Bluetooth
environments.

### [edit] Bluetooth 1.1

  * Ratified as IEEE Standard 802.15.1-2002.
  * Many errors found in the 1.0B specifications were fixed.
  * Added support for non-encrypted channels.
  * Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI).

### [edit] Bluetooth 1.2

This version is backward compatible with 1.1 and the major enhancements
include the following:

  * Faster Connection and Discovery
  * Adaptive frequency-hopping spread spectrum (AFH), which improves resistance to radio frequency interference by avoiding the use of crowded frequencies in the hopping sequence.
  * Higher transmission speeds in practice, up to 721 kbit/s, than in 1.1.
  * Extended Synchronous Connections (eSCO), which improve voice quality of audio links by allowing retransmissions of corrupted packets, and may optionally increase audio latency to provide better support for concurrent data transfer.
  * Host Controller Interface (HCI) support for three-wire UART.
  * Ratified as IEEE Standard 802.15.1-2005.

### [edit] Bluetooth 2.0

This version of the Bluetooth specification was released on November 10, 2004.
It is backward compatible with the previous version 1.1. The main difference
is the introduction of an Enhanced Data Rate (EDR) for faster data transfer.
The nominal rate of EDR is about 3 megabits per second, although the practical
data transfer rate is 2.1 megabits per second.[11] The additional throughput
is obtained by using a different radio technology for transmission of the
data. Standard, or Basic Rate, transmission uses Gaussian Frequency Shift
Keying (GFSK) modulation of the radio signal with a gross air data rate of
1Mbps. EDR uses a combination of GFSK and Phase Shift Keying modulation (PSK)
with two variants, Ï/4-DQPSK and 8DPSK. These have gross air data rates of 2,
and 3Mbps respectively. [12]

According to the 2.0 specification, EDR provides the following benefits:

  * Three times faster transmission speed â up to 10 times (2.1 Mbit/s) in some cases.
  * Reduced complexity of multiple simultaneous connections due to additional bandwidth.
  * Lower power consumption through a reduced duty cycle.

The Bluetooth Special Interest Group (SIG) published the specification as
"Bluetooth 2.0 + EDR" which implies that EDR is an optional feature. Aside
from EDR, there are other minor improvements to the 2.0 specification, and
products may claim compliance to "Bluetooth 2.0" without supporting the higher
data rate. At least one commercial device, the HTC TyTN Pocket PC phone,
states "Bluetooth 2.0 without EDR" on its data sheet.[13]

### [edit] Bluetooth 2.1

Bluetooth Core Specification Version 2.1 is fully backward compatible with
1.1, and was adopted by the Bluetooth SIG on July 26, 2007.[12] This
specification includes the following features:

  * Extended inquiry response: provides more information during the inquiry procedure to allow better filtering of devices before connection. This information includes the name of the device, a list of services the device supports, plus other information like the time of day and pairing information.

  * Sniff subrating: reduces the power consumption when devices are in the sniff low-power mode, especially on links with asymmetric data flows. Human interface devices (HID) are expected to benefit the most, with mouse and keyboard devices increasing their battery life by a factor of 3 to 10. It lets devices decide how long they will wait before sending keepalive messages to one another. Previous Bluetooth implementations featured keep alive message frequencies of up to several times per second. In contrast, the 2.1 specification allows pairs of devices to negotiate this value between them to as infrequently as once every 5 or 10 seconds.

  * Encryption Pause Resume: enables an encryption key to be refreshed, enabling much stronger encryption for connections that stay up for longer than 23.3 hours (one Bluetooth day).

  * Secure Simple Pairing: radically improves the pairing experience for Bluetooth devices, while increasing the use and strength of security. It is expected that this feature will significantly increase the use of Bluetooth.[14]

  * Near Field Communication (NFC) cooperation: automatic creation of secure Bluetooth connections when NFC radio interface is also available. This functionality is part of the Secure Simple Pairing where NFC is one way of exchanging pairing information. For example, a headset should be paired with a Bluetooth 2.1 phone including NFC just by bringing the two devices close to each other (a few centimeters). Another example is automatic uploading of photos from a mobile phone or camera to a digital picture frame just by bringing the phone or camera close to the frame.[15][16]

### [edit] Future

  * Broadcast Channel: enables Bluetooth information points. This will drive the adoption of Bluetooth into mobile phones, and enable advertising models based around users pulling information from the information points, and not based around the object push model that is used in a limited way today.

  * Topology Management: enables the automatic configuration of the piconet topologies especially in scatternet situations that are becoming more common today. This should all be invisible to the users of the technology, while also making the technology just work.

  * Alternate MAC PHY: enables the use of alternative MAC and PHY's for transporting Bluetooth profile data. The Bluetooth Radio will still be used for device discovery, initial connection and profile configuration, however when lots of data needs to be sent, the high speed alternate MAC PHY's will be used to transport the data. This means that the proven low power connection models of Bluetooth are used when the system is idle, and the low power per bit radios are used when lots of data needs to be sent.

  * QoS improvements: enable audio and video data to be transmitted at a higher quality, especially when best effort traffic is being transmitted in the same piconet.

#### [edit] Bluetooth low energy

Main article: Bluetooth low energy

On June 12, 2007, Nokia and Bluetooth SIG announced that Wibree will be a part
of the Bluetooth specification, as an ultra-low power Bluetooth
technology.[17] Expected use cases include watches displaying Caller ID
information, sports sensors monitoring your heart rate during exercise, and
medical devices. The Medical Devices Working Group is also creating a medical
devices profile and associated protocols to enable this market. Bluetooth low
energy technology is designed for devices to have a battery life of up to one
year.

#### [edit] Bluetooth high speed

On March 28, 2006, the Bluetooth Special Interest Group announced its
selection of the WiMedia Alliance Multi-Band Orthogonal Frequency Division
Multiplexing (MB-OFDM) version of UWB for integration with current Bluetooth
wireless technology.

UWB integration will create a version of Bluetooth wireless technology with a
high-speed/high-data-rate option. This new version of Bluetooth technology
will meet the high-speed demands of synchronizing and transferring large
amounts of data, as well as enabling high-quality video and audio applications
for portable devices, multi-media projectors and television sets, and wireless
VOIP.

At the same time, Bluetooth technology will continue catering to the needs of
very low power applications such as mouse, keyboards, and mono headsets,
enabling devices to select the most appropriate physical radio for the
application requirements, thereby offering the best of both worlds.

Bluetooth SIG is also developing a method of radio substitution to use an
alternate MAC/PHY (such as IEEE 802.11) for application requiring more speed.
It will allow Bluetooth protocols, profiles, security and pairing to be used
in consumer devices on top of the already present 802.11 radio, when
necessary.[18]

On March 16, 2009, the WiMedia Alliance announced it is entering into
technology transfer agreements for the WiMedia Ultra-wideband (UWB)
specifications. WiMedia will transfer all current and future specifications,
including work on future high speed and power optimized implementations, to
the Bluetooth Special Interest Group (SIG), Wireless USB Promoter Group and
the USB Implementers Forum. After the successful completion of the technology
transfer, marketing and related administrative items, the WiMedia Alliance
will cease operations.[19]

#### [edit] Bluetooth 3.0 (Seattle)

The next version of Bluetooth after v2.1, code-named Seattle (the version
number of which is TBD, but is expected to be 3.0) has many of the same
features, but is most notable for plans to adopt ultra-wideband (UWB) radio
technology.[20] This will allow Bluetooth use over UWB radio, enabling very
fast data transfers of up to 480 Mbit/s, while building on the very low-power
idle modes of Bluetooth.

## [edit] Technical information

### [edit] Bluetooth protocol stack

âBluetooth is defined as a layer protocol architecture consisting of core
protocols, cable replacement protocols, telephony control protocols, and
adopted protocolsâ.[21]

Mandatory protocols for all Bluetooth stacks are: LMP, L2CAP and SDP

Additionally, these protocols are almost universally supported: HCI and RFCOMM

#### [edit] LMP (Link Management Protocol)

Used for control of the radio link between two devices. Implemented on the
controller.

#### [edit] L2CAP (Logical Link Control & Adaptation Protocol)

Used to multiplex multiple logical connections between two devices using
different higher level protocols. Provides segmentation and reassembly of on-
air packets. In basic mode, L2CAP provides reliable sequenced packets with a
payload configurable up to 64kB, with 672 bytes as the minimum mandatory
supported size. In retransmission & flow control modes, L2CAP can be
configured for reliable or isochronous data per channel by configuring the
number of retransmissions and flush timeout.

The EL2CAP specification adds an additional "enhanced mode" to the core
specification, which is an improved version of retransmission & flow control
modes.

#### [edit] SDP (Service Discovery Protocol)

Used to allow devices to discover what services each other support, and what
parameters to use to connect to them. For example, when connecting a mobile
phone to a Bluetooth headset, SDP will be used to determine which Bluetooth
profiles are supported by the headset (Headset Profile, Hands Free Profile,
Advanced Audio Distribution Profile etc) and the protocol multiplexer settings
needed to connect to each of them. Each service is identified by a Universally
Unique Identifier (UUID), with official services (Bluetooth profiles) assigned
a short form UUID (16 bits rather than the full 128)

#### [edit] HCI (Host/Controller Interface)

Standardised communication between the host stack (e.g. a PC or mobile phone
OS) and the controller (the Bluetooth I.C.) This standard allows the host
stack or controller I.C. to be swapped with minimal adaptation.

There are several HCI transport layer standards, each using a different
hardware interface to transfer the same command, event and data packets. The
most commonly used are USB (in PCs) and UART (in mobile phones and PDAs).

In Bluetooth devices with simple functionality, e.g. headsets, the host stack
and controller can be implemented on the same microprocessor. In this case the
HCI is optional, although often implemented as an internal software interface.

#### [edit] RFCOMM (Cable replacement protocol)

Radio frequency communications (RFCOMM) is the cable replacement protocol used
to create a virtual serial data stream. RFCOMM provides for binary data
transport and emulates EIA-232 (formerly RS-232) control signals over the
Bluetooth baseband layer.

RFCOMM provides a simple reliable data stream to the user, similar to TCP. It
is used directly by many telephony related profiles as a carrier for AT
commands, as well as being a transport layer for OBEX over Bluetooth.

Many Bluetooth applications use RFCOMM because of its widespread support and
publicly available API on most operating systems. Additionally, applications
that used a serial port to communicate can be quickly ported to use RFCOMM.

#### [edit] BNEP (Bluetooth Network Encapsulation Protocol)

BNEP is used to transfer another protocol stack's data via an L2CAP channel.
Its main purpose is the transmission of IP packets in the Personal Area
Networking Profile. BNEP performs a similar function to SNAP in Wireless LAN.

#### [edit] AVCTP (Audio/Visual Control Transport Protocol)

Used by the remote control profile to transfer AV/C commands over an L2CAP
channel. The music control buttons on a stereo headset use this protocol to
control the music player

#### [edit] AVDTP (Audio/Visual Data Transport Protocol)

Used by the advanced audio distribution profile to stream music to stereo
headsets over an L2CAP channel. Intended to be used by video distribution
profile.

#### [edit] Telephone control protocol

Telephony control protocol-binary (TCS BIN) is the bit-oriented protocol that
defines the call control signaling for the establishment of voice and data
calls between Bluetooth devices. Additionally, âTCS BIN defines mobility
management procedures for handling groups of Bluetooth TCS devicesâ

TCS-BIN is only used by the cordless telephony profile, which failed to
attract implementers. As such it is only of historical interest.

#### [edit] Adopted protocols

Adopted protocols are defined by other standards-making organizations and
incorporated into Bluetoothâs protocol stack, allowing Bluetooth to create
protocols only when necessary. The adopted protocols include:

Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) â Internet standard protocol for transporting
IP datagrams over a point-to-point link

TCP/IP/UDP â Foundation Protocols for TCP/IP protocol suite

Object Exchange Protocol (OBEX) â Session-layer protocol for the exchange of
objects, providing a model for object and operation representation

Wireless Application Environment / Wireless Application Protocol (WAE/WAP) â
WAE specifies an application framework for wireless devices and WAP is an open
standard to provide mobile users access to telephony and information
services.[21]

### [edit] Communication and connection

A master Bluetooth device can communicate with up to seven devices in a
Wireless User Group. This network group of up to eight devices is called a
piconet.

A piconet is an ad-hoc computer network, using Bluetooth technology protocols
to allow one master device to interconnect with up to seven active devices. Up
to 255 further devices can be inactive, or parked, which the master device can
bring into active status at any time.

At any given time, data can be transferred between the master and one other
device, however, the devices can switch roles and the slave can become the
master at any time. The master switches rapidly from one device to another in
a round-robin fashion. (Simultaneous transmission from the master to multiple
other devices is possible, but not used much.)

The Bluetooth specification allows connecting two or more piconets together to
form a scatternet, with some devices acting as a bridge by simultaneously
playing the master role in one piconet and the slave role in another.

Many USB Bluetooth adapters are available, some of which also include an IrDA
adapter. Older (pre-2003) Bluetooth adapters, however, have limited services,
offering only the Bluetooth Enumerator and a less-powerful Bluetooth Radio
incarnation. Such devices can link computers with Bluetooth, but they do not
offer much in the way of services that modern adapters do.

### [edit] Baseband Error Correction

Three types of error correction are implemented in Bluetooth systems,

  * 1/3 rate (Forward Error Correction) (FEC)
  * 2/3 rate FEC
  * Automatic Repeat Request (ARQ)

### [edit] Setting up connections

Any Bluetooth device will transmit the following information on demand:

  * Device name.
  * Device class.
  * List of services.
  * Technical information, for example, device features, manufacturer, Bluetooth specification used, clock offset.

Any device may perform an inquiry to find other devices to connect to, and any
device can be configured to respond to such inquiries. However, if the device
trying to connect knows the address of the device, it always responds to
direct connection requests and transmits the information shown in the list
above if requested. Use of a device's services may require pairing or
acceptance by its owner, but the connection itself can be initiated by any
device and held until it goes out of range. Some devices can be connected to
only one device at a time, and connecting to them prevents them from
connecting to other devices and appearing in inquiries until they disconnect
from the other device.

Every device has a unique 48-bit address. However these addresses are
generally not shown in inquiries. Instead, friendly Bluetooth names are used,
which can be set by the user. This name appears when another user scans for
devices and in lists of paired devices.

Most phones have the Bluetooth name set to the manufacturer and model of the
phone by default. Most phones and laptops show only the Bluetooth names and
special programs are required to get additional information about remote
devices. This can be confusing as, for example, there could be several phones
in range named T610 (see Bluejacking).

### [edit] Pairing

Pairs of devices may establish a trusted relationship by learning (by user
input) a shared secret known as a passkey. A device that wants to communicate
only with a trusted device can cryptographically authenticate the identity of
the other device. Trusted devices may also encrypt the data that they exchange
over the airwaves so that no one can listen in. The encryption can, however,
be turned off, and passkeys are stored on the device file system, not on the
Bluetooth chip itself. Since the Bluetooth address is permanent, a pairing is
preserved, even if the Bluetooth name is changed. Pairs can be deleted at any
time by either device. Devices generally require pairing or prompt the owner
before they allow a remote device to use any or most of their services. Some
devices, such as mobile phones, usually accept OBEX electronic business cards
and notes without any pairing or prompts.

Certain printers and access points allow any device to use their services by
default, much like unsecured Wi-Fi networks. Pairing algorithms are sometimes
manufacturer-specific for transmitters and receivers used in applications such
as music and entertainment.

Bluetooth 2.1 has an optional "touch-to-pair" feature based on Near Field
Communication (NFC). By simply bringing two devices into very close range
(around 10 cm/4 in), pairing can securely take place without entering a
passkey or manual configuration.

### [edit] Air interface

The protocol operates in the license-free ISM band at 2.4-2.4835 GHz. To avoid
interfering with other protocols that use the 2.45 GHz band, the Bluetooth
protocol divides the band into 79 channels (each 1 MHz wide) and changes
channels up to 1600 times per second. Implementations with versions 1.1 and
1.2 reach speeds of 723.1 kbit/s. Version 2.0 implementations feature
Bluetooth Enhanced Data Rate (EDR) and reach 2.1 Mbit/s. Technically, version
2.0 devices have a higher power consumption, but the three times faster rate
reduces the transmission times, effectively reducing power consumption to half
that of 1.x devices (assuming equal traffic load).

## [edit] Security

### [edit] Overview

Bluetooth implements confidentiality, authentication and key derivation with
custom algorithms based on the SAFER+ block cipher. In Bluetooth, key
generation is generally based on a Bluetooth PIN, which must be entered into
both devices. This procedure might be modified if one of the devices has a
fixed PIN, e.g. for headsets or similar devices with a restricted user
interface. During pairing, an initialization key or master key is generated,
using the E22 algorithm.[22] The E0 stream cipher is used for encrypting
packets, granting confidentiality and is based on a shared cryptographic
secret, namely a previously generated link key or master key. Those keys, used
for subsequent encryption of data sent via the air interface, rely on the
Bluetooth PIN, which has been entered into one or both devices.

An overview of Bluetooth vulnerabilities exploits has been published by
Andreas Becker.[23]

In September 2008, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
published a Guide to Bluetooth Security that will serve as reference to
organization on the security capabilities of Bluetooth and steps for securing
Bluetooth technologies effectively. While Bluetooth has its benefits, it is
susceptible to denial of service attacks, eavesdropping, man-in-the-middle
attacks, message modification, and resource misappropriation.
Users/organizations must evaluate their acceptable level of risk and
incorporate security into the lifecycle of Bluetooth devices. To help mitigate
risks, included in the NIST document are security checklists with guidelines
and recommendations for creating and maintaining secure Bluetooth piconets,
headsets, and smart card readers.[24]

### [edit] Bluejacking

Bluejacking is the sending of either a picture or a message from one user to
an unsuspecting user through Bluetooth wireless technology. Common
applications are short messages (e.g. "Youâve just been bluejacked!"),
advertisements (e.g. "Eat at Joeâs"), and business information.[25]
Bluejacking does not involve the removal or alteration of any data from the
device.

### [edit] History of security concerns

#### [edit] 2001

In 2001, Jakobsson and Wetzel from Bell Laboratories discovered flaws in the
pairing protocol of Bluetooth, and also pointed to vulnerabilities in the
encryption scheme. [26]

#### [edit] 2003

In November 2003, Ben and Adam Laurie from A.L. Digital Ltd. discovered that
serious flaws in Bluetooth security may lead to disclosure of personal
data.[27] It should be noted, however, that the reported security problems
concerned some poor implementations of Bluetooth, rather than the protocol
itself.

In a subsequent experiment, Martin Herfurt from the trifinite.group was able
to do a field-trial at the CeBIT fairgrounds, showing the importance of the
problem to the world. A new attack called BlueBug was used for this
experiment.[28] This is one of a number of concerns that have been raised over
the security of Bluetooth communications.

#### [edit] 2004

In 2004 the first purported virus using Bluetooth to spread itself among
mobile phones appeared on the Symbian OS.[29] The virus was first described by
Kaspersky Lab and requires users to confirm the installation of unknown
software before it can propagate. The virus was written as a proof-of-concept
by a group of virus writers known as "29A" and sent to anti-virus groups.
Thus, it should be regarded as a potential (but not real) security threat to
Bluetooth or Symbian OS since the virus has never spread in the wild.

In August 2004, a world-record-setting experiment (see also Bluetooth sniping)
showed that the range of Class 2 Bluetooth radios could be extended to 1.78 km
(1.08 mile) with directional antennas and signal amplifiers.[30] This poses a
potential security threat because it enables attackers to access vulnerable
Bluetooth-devices from a distance beyond expectation. The attacker must also
be able to receive information from the victim to set up a connection. No
attack can be made against a Bluetooth device unless the attacker knows its
Bluetooth address and which channels to transmit on.

#### [edit] 2005

In January 2005, a mobile malware worm known as Lasco.A began targeting mobile
phones using Symbian OS (Series 60 platform) using Bluetooth-enabled devices
to replicate itself and spread to other devices. The worm is self-installing
and begins once the mobile user approves the transfer of the file (velasco.sis
) from another device. Once installed, the worm begins looking for other
Bluetooth-enabled devices to infect. Additionally, the worm infects other .SIS
files on the device, allowing replication to another device through use of
removable media (Secure Digital, Compact Flash, etc.). The worm can render the
mobile device unstable.[31]

In April 2005, Cambridge University security researchers published results of
their actual implementation of passive attacks against the PIN-based pairing
between commercial Bluetooth devices, confirming the attacks to be practicably
fast and the Bluetooth symmetric key establishment method to be vulnerable. To
rectify this vulnerability, they carried out an implementation which showed
that stronger, asymmetric key establishment is feasible for certain classes of
devices, such as mobile phones.[32]

In June 2005, Yaniv Shaked and Avishai Wool published a paper describing both
passive and active methods for obtaining the PIN for a Bluetooth link. The
passive attack allows a suitably equipped attacker to eavesdrop on
communications and spoof, if the attacker was present at the time of initial
pairing. The active method makes use of a specially constructed message that
must be inserted at a specific point in the protocol, to make the master and
slave repeat the pairing process. After that, the first method can be used to
crack the PIN. This attack's major weakness is that it requires the user of
the devices under attack to re-enter the PIN during the attack when the device
prompts them to. Also, this active attack probably requires custom hardware,
since most commercially available Bluetooth devices are not capable of the
timing necessary.[33]

In August 2005, police in Cambridgeshire, England, issued warnings about
thieves using Bluetooth-enabled phones to track other devices left in cars.
Police are advising users to ensure that any mobile networking connections are
de-activated if laptops and other devices are left in this way.[34]

#### [edit] 2006

In April 2006, researchers from Secure Network and F-Secure published a report
that warns of the large number of devices left in a visible state, and issued
statistics on the spread of various Bluetooth services and the ease of spread
of an eventual Bluetooth worm.[35]

#### [edit] 2007

In October 2007, at the Luxemburgish Hack.lu Security Conference, Kevin
Finistere and Thierry Zoller demonstrated and released a remote root shell via
Bluetooth on Mac OS X v10.3.9 and v10.4. They also demonstrated the first
Bluetooth PIN and Linkkeys cracker, which is based on the research of Wool and
Shaked.

## [edit] Health concerns

Main article: Wireless electronic devices and health

Bluetooth uses the microwave radio frequency spectrum in the 2.4 GHz to 2.4835
GHz range. Maximum power output from a Bluetooth radio is 100 mW, 2.5 mW, and
1 mW for Class 1, Class 2, and Class 3 devices respectively, which puts Class
1 at roughly the same level as mobile phones, and the other two classes much
lower.[36] Accordingly, Class 2 and Class 3 Bluetooth devices are considered
less of a potential hazard than mobile phones, and Class 1 may be comparable
to that of mobile phones.

## [edit] See also

  * Jellingspot Data Server
  * Handsfree
  * IEEE 802.15
  * Near Field Communication
  * Personal Area Network
  * Tethering
  * Wibree \- complementary standard with lower power consumption, developed by Nokia, now named ULP Bluetooth.
  * Wireless USB
  * ZigBee \- low power lightweight wireless protocol in the ISM band.
  * Bluetooth stack
  * Java APIs for Bluetooth
  * Bluesniping
  * Bluejacking

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Monson, Heidi (1999-12-14). "Bluetooth Technology and Implications". SysOpt.com. http://www.sysopt.com/features/network/article.php/3532506. Retrieved on 2009-02-17.
  2. ^ "About the Bluetooth SIG". Bluetooth SIG. http://www.bluetooth.com/Bluetooth/SIG/. Retrieved on 2008-02-01.
  3. ^ Kardach, Jim (2008-05-03). "How Bluetooth got its name". http://www.eetimes.eu/scandinavia/206902019?cid=RSSfeed_eetimesEU_scandinavia. Retrieved on 2009-02-24.
  4. ^ a b Newton, Harold. (2007). Newtonâs telecom dictionary. New York: Flatiron Publishing.
  5. ^ "How Bluetooth Technology Works". Bluetooth SIG. http://www.bluetooth.com/Bluetooth/Technology/Works/. Retrieved on 2008-02-01.
  6. ^ "Wii Controller". Bluetooth SIG. http://bluetooth.com/Bluetooth/Products/Products/Product_Details.htm?ProductID=2951. Retrieved on 2008-02-01.
  7. ^ Apple (2002-07-17). Apple Introduces "Jaguar," the Next Major Release of Mac OS X. Press release. http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2002/jul/17jaguar.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-04.
  8. ^ "Network Protection Technologie". Changes to Functionality in Microsoft Windows XP Service Pack 2. Microsoft Technet. http://www.microsoft.com/technet/prodtechnol/winxppro/maintain/sp2netwk.mspx. Retrieved on 2008-02-01.
  9. ^ BlueZ - Official Linux Bluetooth protocol stack
  10. ^ "The Bluetooth Blues". Information Age. 2001-05-24. http://www.information-age.com/article/2001/may/the_bluetooth_blues. Retrieved on 2008-02-01.
  11. ^ Guy Kewney (2004-11-16). "High speed Bluetooth comes a step closer: enhanced data rate approved". Newswireless.net. http://www.newswireless.net/index.cfm/article/629. Retrieved on 2008-02-04.
  12. ^ a b "Specification Documents". Bluetooth SIG. http://www.bluetooth.com/Bluetooth/Technology/Building/Specifications/. Retrieved on 2008-02-04.
  13. ^ "HTC TyTN Specification" (PDF). HTC. http://www.europe.htc.com/z/pdf/products/1766_TyTN_LFLT_OUT.PDF. Retrieved on 2008-02-04.
  14. ^ (PDF)Simple Pairing Whitepaper. Version V10r00. Bluetooth SIG. 2006-08-03. http://bluetooth.com/NR/rdonlyres/0A0B3F36-D15F-4470-85A6-F2CCFA26F70F/0/SimplePairing_WP_V10r00.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-02-01.
  15. ^ Michael Oryl (2007-03-15). "Bluetooth 2.1 Offers Touch Based Pairing, Reduced Power Consumption". MobileBurn. http://www.mobileburn.com/news.jsp?Id=3213. Retrieved on 2008-02-04.
  16. ^ Taoufik Ghanname (2007-02-14). "How NFC can to speed Bluetooth transactions-today". Wireless Net DesignLine. http://www.wirelessnetdesignline.com/howto/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=180201430. Retrieved on 2008-02-04.
  17. ^ Nokia (2007-06-12) (PDF). Wibree forum merges with Bluetooth SIG. Press release. http://www.wibree.com/press/Wibree_pressrelease_final_1206.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-02-04.
  18. ^ BLUETOOTH TECHNOLOGY TO HARNESS THE SPEED OF 802.11
  19. ^ [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]
  20. ^ Michal Lev-Ram. "Bluetooth's amazing makeover". Business 2.0 Magazine. http://money.cnn.com/magazines/business2/business2_archive/2007/06/01/100050968/index.htm. Retrieved on 2009-02-19.
  21. ^ a b Stallings, William. (2005). Wireless communications & networks. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
  22. ^ Juha T. Vainio (2000-05-25). "Bluetooth Security". Helsinki University of Technology. http://www.iki.fi/jiitv/bluesec.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-01-01.
  23. ^ Andreas Becker (2007-08-16) (PDF). Bluetooth Security & Hacks. Ruhr-UniversitÃ¤t Bochum. http://gsyc.es/~anto/ubicuos2/bluetooth_security_and_hacks.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-10.
  24. ^ Scarfone, K., and Padgette, J. (September 2008) (PDF). Guide to Bluetooth Security. National Institute of Standards and Technology. http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-121/SP800-121.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-10-03.
  25. ^ "What is bluejacking?". Helsinki University of Technology. http://www.bluejackq.com/what-is-bluejacking.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-05-01.
  26. ^ "Security Weaknesses in Bluetooth". RSA Security Conf. â Cryptographerâs Track. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.23.7357. Retrieved on 2009-03-01.
  27. ^ "Bluetooth". The Bunker. http://www.thebunker.net/resources/bluetooth. Retrieved on 2007-02-01.
  28. ^ "BlueBug". Trifinite.org. http://trifinite.org/trifinite_stuff_bluebug.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-01.
  29. ^ John Oates (2004-06-15). "Virus attacks mobiles via Bluetooth". The Register. http://www.theregister.co.uk/2004/06/15/symbian_virus/. Retrieved on 2007-02-01.
  30. ^ "Long Distance Snarf". Trifinite.org. http://trifinite.org/trifinite_stuff_lds.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-01.
  31. ^ "F-Secure Malware Information Pages: Lasco.A". F-Secure.com. http://www.f-secure.com/v-descs/lasco_a.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-05-05.
  32. ^ Ford-Long Wong, Frank Stajano, Jolyon Clulow (2005-04) (PDF). Repairing the Bluetooth pairing protocol. University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory. http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~fw242/publications/2005-WongStaClu-bluetooth.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-02-01.
  33. ^ Yaniv Shaked, Avishai Wool (2005-05-02). Cracking the Bluetooth PIN. School of Electrical Engineering Systems, Tel Aviv University. http://www.eng.tau.ac.il/~yash/shaked-wool-mobisys05/. Retrieved on 2007-02-01.
  34. ^ "Phone pirates in seek and steal mission". Cambridge Evening News. Archived from the original on 2007-07-17. http://web.archive.org/web/20070717035938/http://www.cambridge-news.co.uk/news/region_wide/2005/08/17/06967453-8002-45f8-b520-66b9bed6f29f.lpf. Retrieved on 2008-02-04.
  35. ^ (PDF)Going Around with Bluetooth in Full Safety. F-Secure. 2006-05. http://www.securenetwork.it/bluebag_brochure.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-02-04.
  36. ^ M. Hietanen, T. Alanko (2005-10). "Occupational Exposure Related to Radiofrequency Fields from Wireless Communication Systems" (PDF). XXVIIIth General Assembly of URSI - Proceedings. Union Radio-Scientifique Internationale. http://www.ursi.org/Proceedings/ProcGA05/pdf/K03.7(01682).pdf. Retrieved on 2007-04-19.

## [edit] External links

<IMG>

This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or
guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate
external links.  
  * [7]BLUETOOTH SECURITY PAPER
  * Bluetooth Special Interest Group Site (includes specifications)
  * Official Bluetooth site aimed at users
  * Official Bluetooth gadget guide, aimed at users
  * Introduction and detailed information
  * OMTP Bluetooth Local Connectivity Paper
  * Bluetooth affect other 3G & IMT-2000 (aka WiMAX devices), Softpedia Report

Internet Access  
Network Type Wired Wireless  
Optical Coaxial Cable Ethernet Cable Phone line Power line Unlicensed
terrestrial bands Licensed terrestrial bands Satellite  
LAN 1000BASE-X G.hn Ethernet HomePNA Â· G.hn G.hn Wi-Fi Â· Bluetooth Â· DECT
Â· Wireless USB  
WAN PON DOCSIS Dial-up Â· ISDN Â· DSL BPL Muni Wi-Fi GPRS Â· iBurst Â·
WiBro/WiMAX Â· UMTS-TDD, HSPA Â· EVDO Â· LTE Satellite  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bluetooth"

Categories: Bluetooth | Mobile computers | Networking standards | Wireless

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2009 | Wikipedia external links cleanup

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Kapampangan
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Nnapulitano
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Soomaaliga
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 06:27.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



