
# comScore

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

comScore, Inc. Image:CS LOGO.png  
Type Public Company, (NASDAQ: SCOR)  
Founded 1999  
Founder(s) Magid Abraham and Gian Fulgoni  
Headquarters Reston, VA  
Industry Internet information providers  
Employees 700  
Website comScore.com  
comScore (NASDAQ: SCOR) is an internet marketing research company providing
marketing data and services to many of the Internet's largest businesses.[1]
comScore tracks all internet data on its surveyed computers in order to study
online behavior.

## Contents

  * 1 Company history
  * 2 Data collection and reporting
  * 3 Criticism
  * 4 Awards
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Company history

comScore Networks was founded in August 1999 in Reston, Virginia.[2] The
company was co-founded by Gian Fulgoni, who was for many years the CEO of
Information Resources (one of the world's largest market research companies)
and Magid Abraham, who was also an ex-IRI employee and had served as President
of IRI in the mid-1990s.

Magid and Gian came up with the idea while working with one of the original
investors in the company, Mike Santer, who thought up the concept of creating
a very large consumer panel online to track online commerce. The problem was
that the traditional methods in which companies were tracking online behavior
would not work in tracking commerce, because of the lower incidence of buying
online. Normal panels in tracking visitation would be around 20-30K and, with
less than 2-3% of the population buying online, the panel size needed to be at
least 1-2MM. They decided to build a very large panel using more aggressive
recruiting methodology and managing for the error by using advanced
statistical methods and controls. Years and tens of millions of dollars went
into finding the best ways to measure online buying and other behaviors, plus
the level of accuracy required for Fortune 1000 companies to buy.

In 2000, comScore bought certain assets and the customer agreements of PCData
of Reston, Virginia. PCData was among the earliest Web measurement firms, but
increasing competitive challenges (including a threat of a patent infringement
lawsuit by industry pioneer Media Metrix) put PCData's future in doubt. The
acquisition of PCData's large customer base helped accelerate the growth of
comScore's syndicated measurement service, which was widely considered to be
more accurate than the service which PCData technology previously delivered.

By 2001, Media Metrix had built a market share lead but had been unable to
create a sustainable financial structure. NetRatings, its closest competitor,
was armed with strong capital reserves and announced its intention to acquire
and integrate Media Metrix. However, after several months, the FTC announced
its intention to block the acquisition and accordingly, NetRatings canceled
the transaction. comScore was subsequently able to acquire Media Metrix in a
deal announced in June 2002.

Media Metrix originated as PC Meter, a business unit of market research
company NPD and began publishing statistics in January 1996.[3] In July 1997,
it changed its name to Media Metrix, citing the desire to track a wider
variety of interactive traffic.[4] In October 1998, Media Metrix merged with
its nearest rival, Relevant Knowledge.[5] The company went public as
NASDAQ:MMXI in May 1999, reaching a market cap of $135 million on its first
day of trading.[6] In June 2000, the company acquired Jupiter Communications
for $414 million in stock and changed its name to Jupiter Media Metrix.[7] In
the aftermath of the dot-com bubble collapse and associated downturn in
internet marketing spending, Jupiter sold the Media Metrix service to rival
comScore for $1.5 million in June 2002.[8]

On March 30, 2007, comScore announced its intent to sell shares in an initial
public offering and be traded on the Nasdaq using the symbol "SCOR".[9][10]

## [edit] Data collection and reporting

comScore maintains a group of users who have monitoring software (with brands
including PermissionResearch and OpinionSquare) installed on their
computers.[citation needed] In exchange for joining the comScore research
panels, users are presented with various benefits, including computer security
software, Internet data storage, virus scanning and chances to win cash or
prizes.[citation needed]

comScore is up-front about collecting user data and the software's ability to
track all of a user's internet traffic,[11] including normally secure
(https://) connections used to communicate banking and other confidential
information.[12]

comScore estimates that two million users are part of the monitoring
program.[10] However, self-selected populations, no matter how large, may not
be representative of the population as a whole. To obtain the most accurate
data, comScore adjusts the statistics using weights to make sure that each
population segment is adequately represented. To calculate these weights,
comScore regularly recruits panelists using random digit dialing and other
offline recruiting methods to accurately determine how many users are online,
aggregated by geography, income and age.[13][14][15] Correcting the comScore
data requires having accurate demographics about the larger pool of users.
However, some comScore users are recruited without being asked to give
demographic information and, in other cases, users may not be truthful about
their demographics. To ensure the accuracy of the data, comScore verifies its
users' demographics during the course of measuring statistical data.[16]

The corrected data is used to generate reports on topics ranging from web
traffic[17] to video streaming activity[18] and consumer buying power.[19]

## [edit] Criticism

Ben Edelman, a Harvard researcher, alleges[20] that there are cases where
comScore software has been installed on users' computers without their
knowledge. comScore admits that it was in discussion with DollarRevenue, a
company known for distributing spyware. However, comScore says that no
contract was ever signed, and that once it realized DollarRevenue was
distributing comScore's software months later, it took steps to prevent the
DollarRevenue-distributed software from sending data to comScore.[21] Stanford
IT notes that the monitoring software has been bundled with file sharing
program iMesh without users being aware of it,[12] although comScore's
relationship with iMesh was short-lived and occurred several years ago.[21]

In the past, the software forwarded users' internet traffic through comScore
proxy servers, provoking criticism among IT professionals.[12][22] As a
result, several universities and banks took steps to block the proxy
servers.[23][24] In response to these concerns, comScore no longer uses this
technology.[citation needed]

## [edit] Awards

comScore was selected by World Economic Forum as one of 47 innovative
companies in 2007.[25]

## [edit] See also

Competitors in internet market research include Alexa, Compete.com, Nielsen
Online, Hitwise, Quantcast and Gemius.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "comScore Clients". http://www.comscore.com/about/clients.asp. Retrieved on 2006-10-01.
  2. ^ "comScore Networks Introduces "Customer Knowledge Platform" that Provides a 360Â° View of Customer Buying and Browsing Behavior on the Internet". comScore. 2000-09-18. http://www.comscore.com/press/release.asp?press=6.
  3. ^ Surfing Down Memory Lane to January 1996: comScore Media Metrix Revisits First-Ever Web Site Rankings
  4. ^ "PC Meter Renames, Remakes Itself". Wired News. 1997-07-21. http://web.archive.org/web/20041201145733/www.wired.com/news/business/0,1367,5357,00.html.
  5. ^ "2 Rating Services For Web Merge". SFGate. 1998-10-13. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/chronicle/archive/1998/10/13/BU94264.DTL.
  6. ^ "May 7, 1999 Market Close". Motley Fool. http://www.fool.com/EveningNews/1999/EveningNews990507.htm.
  7. ^ "Media Metrix, Jupiter merge in $414 million deal". CNET. 2000-06-27. http://news.com.com/2100-1023-242455.html.
  8. ^ "Jupiter sells part of measurement unit". CNET. 2002-06-06. http://news.com.com/2100-1023_3-933580.html.
  9. ^ "Web-traffic specialist comScore files for IPO". MarketWatch. 2007-04-02. http://www.marketwatch.com/news/story/internet-traffic-counter-comscore-files-ipo/story.aspx?guid=%7BAB5A4648-74D2-409B-AA9A-D8B7AB025FE0%7D.
  10. ^ a b "comScore's March 30th S-1 SEC form". SEC. 2007-03-30. http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1158172/000095013307001479/w30988sv1.htm.
  11. ^ "OpinionSquare Privacy Policy & User License Agreement". http://www.opinionsquare.com/Privacy.aspx. Retrieved on 2006-11-02.
  12. ^ a b c "MarketScore Spyware". Stanford Information Security Office. 2005-01-11. http://www.stanford.edu/group/security/securecomputing/2005/01/marketscore_spyware.html.
  13. ^ Review of comScore Methodology. Advertising Research Foundation (ARF). 2001. http://www.comscore.com/method/arf.asp.
  14. ^ "Collecting & Analyzing Web Usage Data from User Panels". comScore. 2001-04. p7,9,13. http://cendi.dtic.mil/presentations/KevinGartonApr17.ppt.
  15. ^ "comScore Methodology". http://www.comscore.com/method/method.asp. Retrieved on 2006-11-02.
  16. ^ "The âProfessional Respondentâ Problem In Online Survey Panels Today". comScore. 2005-06. p8-10. http://www.sigmavalidation.com/tips/05_06_02_Online_Survey_Panels.ppt.
  17. ^ "comScore Releases Worldwide Ranking of Top Web Properties". comScore. 2006-10-26. http://www.comscore.com/press/release.asp?press=1049.
  18. ^ "comScore Releases U.S. Video Metrix Rankings". comScore. 2006-09-27. http://www.comscore.com/press/release.asp?press=1015.
  19. ^ "Newspaper Web Site Audiences Grow Faster Than Total Internet Populations In Largest U.S. Markets". comScore. 2002-07-08. http://www.comscore.com/press/release.asp?press=81.
  20. ^ Ben Edelman (2006-07-26). "Comscore Doesn't Always Get Consent". benedelman.org. http://www.benedelman.org/news/062907-1.html.
  21. ^ a b Lisa Lerer (2006-12-97). "How Much Privacy?". Forbes. http://www.forbes.com/security/2006/12/07/internet-security-research-tech_cx_ll_1208comscore.html.
  22. ^ "An Analysis of the New Marketscore Proxy". Cornell's IT Security Office. 2005-05-31. http://www.cit.cornell.edu/computer/security/marketscore/technical.html.
  23. ^ "'Researchware' watches where you click". MSNBC. 2005-04-20. http://msnbc.msn.com/id/7546554/.
  24. ^ "ComScore: Spyware or 'researchware'?". CNET. 2004-12-20. http://news.com.com/ComScore+Spyware+or+researchware/2100-1032_3-5494004.html.
  25. ^ "Technology Pioneers". World Economic Forum. http://www.weforum.org/en/about/Technology%20Pioneers/index.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-19.

## [edit] External links

  * comScore
  * OpinionSquare and PermissionResearch (often classified as spyware), distribution sites for comScore's data-collection software
  * Sears.com: Join the Community â Get Spyware CA Security Advisor Research Blog entry about Sears and comScore

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ComScore"

Categories: Companies listed on NASDAQ | Marketing research companies |
Companies established in 1999 | Spyware

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 25 March 2009, at 12:40 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



