
# Front side bus

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2008)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

A typical north/southbridge layout

In personal computers, the Front Side Bus (FSB) is the bus that carries data
between the CPU and the northbridge.

Depending on the processor used, some computers may also have a back side bus
that connects the CPU to the cache. This bus and the cache connected to it is
faster than accessing the system memory via the front side bus.

The bandwidth or maximum theoretical throughput of the front side bus is
determined by the product of the width of its data path, its clock frequency
(cycles per second) and the number of data transfers it performs per clock
cycle. For example, a 32-bit (4-byte) wide FSB operating at a frequency of 100
MHz that performs 4 transfers per cycle has a bandwidth of 1600 megabytes per
second (MB/s).

The number of transfers per clock cycle is dependent on the technology used.
For example, GTL+ performs 1 transfer/cycle, EV6 2 transfers/cycle, and AGTL+
4 transfers/cycle. Intel calls the technique of four transfers per cycle Quad
Pumping.

Many manufacturers today publish the speed of the FSB in megatransfers per
second (MT/s), not the FSB clock frequency in megahertz (MHz). This is because
the actual speed is determined by how many transfers can be performed each
clock cycle as well as by the clock frequency. For example, if a motherboard
(or processor) has a FSB clocked at 200 MHz and performs 4 transfers per clock
cycle, the FSB is rated at 800 MT/s.

## Contents

  * 1 History and current usage
  * 2 Related component speeds
    * 2.1 CPU
    * 2.2 Memory
    * 2.3 Peripheral buses
    * 2.4 Overclocking
  * 3 Pros and cons
    * 3.1 Pros
    * 3.2 Cons
  * 4 See also

  
## [edit] History and current usage

The front side bus is an alternative name for the data and address buses of
the CPU as defined by the manufacturer's datasheet. The term is mostly
associated with the various CPU buses used on PC-related motherboards
(including servers etc), seldom with the data and address buses used in
embedded systems and similar small computers.

Front side buses serve as a connection between the CPU and the rest of the
hardware via a so-called chipset. This chipset is usually divided in a
northbridge and a southbridge part, and is the connection point for all other
buses in the system. Buses like the PCI, AGP, and memory buses all connect to
the chipset in order for data to flow between the connected devices. These
secondary system buses usually run at speeds derived from the front side bus
clock, but are not necessarily synchronous to it.

In response to AMD's Torrenza initiative, Intel has opened its FSB CPU socket
to third party devices [1][2]. Prior to this announcement, made in Spring 2007
at Intel Developer Forum in Beijing, Intel had very closely guarded who had
access to the FSB, only allowing Intel processors in the CPU socket. This is
now changing, the first example being FPGA co-processors, a result of
collaboration between Intel-Xilinx-Nallatech [3] and Intel-Altera-XtremeData
[4] [5].

## [edit] Related component speeds

### [edit] CPU

The frequency at which a processor (CPU) operates is determined by applying a
clock multiplier to the front side bus (FSB) speed in some cases. For example,
a processor running at 3200 MHz might be using a 400 MHz FSB. This means there
is an internal clock multiplier setting (also called bus/core ratio) of 8.
That is, the CPU is set to run at 8 times the frequency of the front side bus:
400 MHz Ã 8 = 3200 MHz. By varying either the FSB or the multiplier,
different CPU speeds can be achieved.

### [edit] Memory

See also: Memory divider

Setting an FSB speed is related directly to the speed grade of memory a system
must use. The memory bus connects the northbridge and RAM, just as the front
side bus connects the CPU and northbridge. Often, these two buses must operate
at the same frequency. Increasing the front-side bus to 450 MHz in most cases
also means running the memory at 450 MHz.

In newer systems, it is possible to see memory ratios of "4:5" and the like.
The memory will run 5/4 times as fast as the FSB in this situation, meaning a
400 MHz bus can run with the memory at 500 MHz. This is often referred to as
an 'asynchronous' system. It is important to realize that due to differences
in CPU and system architecture, overall system performance can vary in
unexpected ways with different FSB-to-memory ratios.

In image, audio, video, gaming and scientific applications that perform a
small amount of work on each element of a large data set, FSB speed becomes a
major performance issue. A slow FSB will cause the CPU to spend significant
amounts of time waiting for data to arrive from system memory. However, if the
computations involving each element are more complex the processor will spend
longer performing these and the FSB will be able to keep pace, because the
rate at which memory is accessed is reduced.

### [edit] Peripheral buses

Similar to the memory bus, the PCI and AGP buses can also be run
asynchronously from the front side bus. In older systems, these buses operated
at a set fraction of the front side bus frequency. This fraction was set by
the BIOS. In newer systems the PCI, AGP, and PCI Express peripheral buses
often receive their own clock signals, which eliminates their dependence on
the front side bus for timing.

### [edit] Overclocking

Main article: Overclocking

Overclocking is the practice of making computer components operate beyond
their stock performance levels.

Many motherboards allow the user to manually set the clock multiplier and FSB
settings by changing jumpers or BIOS settings. Many CPU manufacturers now
"lock" a preset multiplier setting into the chip. It is possible to unlock
some locked CPUs; for instance, some Athlons can be unlocked by connecting
electrical contacts across points on the CPU's surface. For all processors,
increasing the FSB speed can be done to boost processing speed.

This practice pushes components beyond their specifications and may cause
erratic behaviour, overheating or premature failure. Even if the computer
appears to run normally, problems may appear under heavy load. Most PCs
purchased from retailers or manufacturers, such as Hewlett-Packard or Dell, do
not allow the user to change the multiplier or Front Side Bus settings due to
the probability of erratic behavior or failure. Motherboards purchased
separately to build a custom machine are more likely to allow the user to edit
the multiplier and FSB settings in the PC's BIOS.

## [edit] Pros and cons

### [edit] Pros

Although the front side bus architecture is an aging technology, it does have
the advantage of high flexibility and low cost. There is no theoretical limit
to the number of CPUs that can be placed on a FSB, though performance will not
scale linearly across additional CPUs (due to the architecture's bandwidth
bottleneck).

### [edit] Cons

The front side bus as it is traditionally known may be disappearing.
Originally, this bus was a central connecting point for all system devices and
the CPU. In recent years this has been breaking down with increasing use of
individual point-to-point buses (see HyperTransport and QuickPath). The front
side bus has been criticized by AMD as being an old and slow technology that
bottlenecks today's computer systems. While a faster CPU can execute
individual instructions faster, this is wasted if it can't fetch instructions
and data as fast as it can execute them; when this happens, the CPU must wait
for one or more clock cycles until the memory returns its value. Furthermore,
a fast CPU can be delayed when it must access other devices attached to the
FSB. Thus, a slow FSB can become a bottleneck that slows down a fast CPU.

## [edit] See also

  * HyperTransport
  * Intel QuickPath Interconnect

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Computer motherboards  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Front_side_bus"

Categories: Computer buses | Motherboard

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from June 2008 | All articles
lacking sources

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Bosanski
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 22 March 2009, at 14:15.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



