
# Image file formats

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Image file formats are standardized means of organizing and storing images.
This entry is about digital image formats used to store photographic and other
images; (for disk-image file formats see Disk image). Image files are composed
of either pixel or vector (geometric) data that are rasterized to pixels when
displayed (with few exceptions) in a vector graphic display. The pixels that
compose an image are ordered as a grid (columns and rows); each pixel consists
of numbers representing magnitudes of brightness and colour.

## Contents

  * 1 Image file sizes
  * 2 Image file compression
  * 3 Major graphic file formats
    * 3.1 Raster formats
      * 3.1.1 JPEG
      * 3.1.2 TIFF
      * 3.1.3 RAW
      * 3.1.4 PNG
      * 3.1.5 GIF
      * 3.1.6 BMP
      * 3.1.7 PPM, PGM, PBM, PNM
    * 3.2 Vector formats
      * 3.2.1 CGM
      * 3.2.2 SVG
      * 3.2.3 ODG
      * 3.2.4 Others
  * 4 References
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Image file sizes

Image file sizeâexpressed as the number of bytesâincreases with the number
of pixels composing an image, and the colour depth of the pixels. The greater
the number of rows and columns, the greater the image resolution, and the
larger the file. Also, each pixel of an image increases in size when its
colour depth increasesâan 8-bit pixel (1 byte) stores 256 colours, a 24-bit
pixel (3 bytes) stores 16 million colors, the latter known as truecolor.

Image compression uses algorithms to decrease the size of a file. High
resolution cameras produce large image files, ranging from hundreds of
kilobytes to megabytes, per the camera's resolution and the image-storage
format capacity. High resolution digital cameras record 8 megapixel (1MP =
1,000,000 pixels / 1 million) images, or more, in truecolor. For example, an
image recorded by an 8 MP camera; since each pixel uses 3 bytes to record
truecolor, the uncompressed image would occupy 24,000,000 bytes of memoryâa
great amount of digital storage for one image, given that cameras must record
and store many images to be practical. Faced with large file sizes, both
within the camera and a storage disc, image file formats were developed to
store such large images. An overview of the major graphic file formats follows
below.

## [edit] Image file compression

There are two types of image file compression algorithms: lossless and lossy.

Lossless compression algorithms reduce file size without losing image quality,
though they are not compressed into as small a file as a lossy compression
file. When image quality is valued above file size, lossless algorithms are
typically chosen.

Lossy compression algorithms take advantage of the inherent limitations of the
human eye and discard invisible information. Most lossy compression algorithms
allow for variable quality levels (compression) and as these levels are
increased, file size is reduced. At the highest compression levels, image
deterioration becomes noticeable as "compression artifacting".

The images below demonstrate the noticeable artifacting of lossy compression
algorithms; select the thumbnail image to view the full size version.[1]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Lossless Image Compression

<IMG>

<IMG>

Lossy Image Compression

  

## [edit] Major graphic file formats

Including proprietary types, there are hundreds of image file types.[2] The
PNG, JPEG, and GIF formats are most often used to display images on the
Internet. These graphic formats are listed and briefly described below,
separated into the two main families of graphics: raster and vector.

In addition to straight image formats, Metafile formats are portable formats
which can include contain both raster and vector information. Examples are
application-independent formats such as WMF and EMF. The metafile format is an
intermediate format. Most Windows applications open metafiles and then save
them in their own native format.[3][4] Page description language refers to
formats used to describe the layout of a printed page containing text, objects
and images. Examples are PostScript, PDF and PCL.

### [edit] Raster formats

These formats store images as bitmaps (also known as pixmaps). For a
description of the technology aside from the format, see Raster graphics.

##### [edit] JPEG

JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group) files are (in most cases) a lossy
format; the DOS filename extension is JPG (other operating systems may use
JPEG). Nearly every digital camera can save images in the JPEG format, which
supports 8 bits per color (red, green, blue) for a 24-bit total, producing
relatively small files. When not too great, the compression does not
noticeably detract from the image's quality, but JPEG files suffer
generational degradation when repeatedly edited and saved. Photographic images
may be better stored in a lossless non-JPEG format if they will be re-edited,
or if small "artifacts" (blemishes caused by the JPEG's compression algorithm)
are unacceptable. The JPEG format also is used as the image compression
algorithm in many Adobe PDF files.

The Exif (Exchangeable image file) format is an algorithm incorporated in the
JPEG software used in most cameras. Its purpose is to record and to
standardize the exchange of data between digital cameras and editing and
viewing software. The data is recorded for individual images and includes such
things as: camera settings, time and date, shutter speed, exposure, image
size, compression, name of camera, color information, etc. When images are
viewed or edited by image editors, such as Paint Shop Pro, all of this image
information can be displayed.

##### [edit] TIFF

The TIFF (Tagged Image File Format) is a flexible format that normally saves 8
bits or 16 bits per color (red, green, blue) for 24-bit and 48-bit totals,
respectively, using either the TIFF or the TIF filenames. The TIFF's
flexibility is both blessing and curse, because no single reader reads every
type of TIFF file. TIFFs are lossy and lossless; some offer relatively good
lossless compression for bi-level (black&white) images. Some digital cameras
can save in TIFF format, using the LZW compression algorithm for lossless
storage. The TIFF image format is not widely supported by web browsers. TIFF
remains widely accepted as a photograph file standard in the printing
business. The TIFF can handle device-specific colour spaces, such as the CMYK
defined by a particular set of printing press inks. OCR (Optical Character
Recognition) software packages commonly generate some (often monochromatic)
form of TIFF image for scanned text pages.

##### [edit] RAW

RAW refers to a family of raw image formats that are options available on some
digital cameras. These formats usually use a lossless or nearly-lossless
compression, and produce file sizes much smaller than the TIFF formats of
full-size processed images from the same cameras. The raw formats are not
standardized or documented, and differ among camera manufacturers. Many
graphic programs and image editors may not accept some or all of them, and
some older ones have been effectively orphaned already. Adobe's Digital
Negative specification is an attempt at standardizing a raw image format to be
used by cameras, or for archival storage of image data converted from
proprietary raw image formats.

##### [edit] PNG

The PNG (Portable Network Graphics) file format was created as the free, open-
source successor to the GIF. The PNG file format supports truecolor (16
million colors) while the GIF supports only 256 colors. The PNG file excels
when the image has large, uniformly colored areas. The lossless PNG format is
best suited for editing pictures, and the lossy formats, like JPG, are best
for the final distribution of photographic images, because JPG files are
smaller than PNG files. Many older browsers currently do not support the PNG
file format, however, with Mozilla Firefox or Internet Explorer 7, all
contemporary web browsers now support all common uses of the PNG format,
including full 8-bit translucency (Internet Explorer 7 may display odd colors
on translucent images ONLY when combined with IE's opacity filter). The
Adam7-interlacing allows an early preview, even when only a small percentage
of the image data has been transmitted. PNG, an extensible file format for the
lossless, portable, well-compressed storage of raster images. PNG provides a
patent-free replacement for GIF and can also replace many common uses of TIFF.
Indexed-color, grayscale, and truecolor images are supported, plus an optional
alpha channel. PNG is designed to work well in online viewing applications,
such as the World Wide Web, so it is fully streamable with a progressive
display option. PNG is robust, providing both full file integrity checking and
simple detection of common transmission errors. Also, PNG can store gamma and
chromaticity data for improved color matching on heterogeneous platforms.

##### [edit] GIF

GIF (Graphics Interchange Format) is limited to an 8-bit palette, or 256
colors. This makes the GIF format suitable for storing graphics with
relatively few colors such as simple diagrams, shapes, logos and cartoon style
images. The GIF format supports animation and is still widely used to provide
image animation effects. It also uses a lossless compression that is more
effective when large areas have a single color, and ineffective for detailed
images or dithered images.

##### [edit] BMP

The BMP file format (Windows bitmap) handles graphics files within the
Microsoft Windows OS. Typically, BMP files are uncompressed, hence they are
large; the advantage is their simplicity, wide acceptance, and use in Windows
programs.

##### [edit] PPM, PGM, PBM, PNM

Netpbm format is a family including the portable pixmap file format (PPM), the
portable graymap file format (PGM) and the portable bitmap file format (PBM).
These are ASCII files that provide very basic functionality and serve as a
lowest-common-denominator for converting pixmap, graymap, or bitmap files
between different platforms. Several applications refer to them collectively
as the PNM format (portable anymap).

### [edit] Vector formats

See also: Vector graphics

As opposed to the raster image formats above (where the data describes the
characteristics of each individual pixel), vector image formats contain a
geometric description which can be rendered smoothly at any desired display
size.

Vector file formats can contain bitmap data as well. 3D graphic file formats
are technically vector formats with pixel data texture mapping on the surface
of a vector virtual object, warped to match the angle of the viewing
perspective.

At some point, all vector graphics must be rasterized in order to be displayed
on digital monitors. However, vector images can be displayed with analog CRT
technology such as that used in some electronic test equipment, medical
monitors, radar displays, laser shows and early video games. Plotters are
printers that use vector data rather than pixel data to draw graphics.

#### [edit] CGM

CGM (Computer Graphics Metafile) is a file format for 2D vector graphics,
raster graphics, and text, and is defined by ISO/IEC 8632. All graphical
elements can be specified in a textual source file that can be compiled into a
binary file or one of two text representations. CGM provides a means of
graphics data interchange for computer representation of 2D graphical
information independent from any particular application, system, platform, or
device. It has been adopted to some extent in the areas of technical
illustration and professional design, but has largely been superseded by
formats such as SVG and DXF.

#### [edit] SVG

SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics) is an open standard created and developed by
the World Wide Web Consortium to address the need (and attempts of several
corporations) for a versatile, scriptable and all-purpose vector format for
the web and otherwise. The SVG format does not have a compression scheme of
its own, but due to the textual nature of XML, an SVG graphic can be
compressed using a program such as gzip. Because of its scripting potential,
SVG is a key component in web applications: interactive web pages that look
and act like applications.

#### [edit] ODG

ODG (Open Document Graphics) is an open standard.

  

#### [edit] Others

Other image file formats of vector type include:

  * Encapsulated PostScript
  * PDF
  * SWF
  * Windows Metafile
  * XML Paper Specification (XPS)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ NOTE: These two images are illustrative only, both were converted from a lossless, compressed RAW image in Adobe Photoshop CS2. The lossy image was repeatedly opened and resaved using a low JPEG quality setting to increase visual artifacting and then exported as a PNG, while the "lossless" image was saved once as a PNG to minimize visual artifacting.
  2. ^ Image File Types
  3. ^ MSDN: Windows Metafile Format Specification
  4. ^ MSDN: Enhanced Metafile Format Specification

## [edit] See also

  * Comparison of graphics file formats

## [edit] External links

  * Description of Bitmap graphics file
  * Educational treatment of GIF, PNG, and JPG file formats
  * Dave Coffin's dcraw Converting digital camera raw image format files into other formats.
  * Open Source Library supporting a large number of image formats
  * Which image format is best? Compare BMP, JPG, GIF, PNG, TIFF, WMF and EMF image formats.
  * Bitmap image file types list

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image_file_formats"

Categories: Graphics file formats

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 20 April 2009, at 18:04 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



