
# Information extraction

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

It has been suggested that data extraction be merged into this article or
section. (Discuss)  
In natural language processing, information extraction (IE) is a type of
information retrieval whose goal is to automatically extract structured
information, i.e. categorized and contextually and semantically well-defined
data from a certain domain, from unstructured machine-readable documents. An
example of information extraction is the extraction of instances of corporate
mergers, more formally MergerBetween(company1,company2,date), from an online
news sentence such as: "Yesterday, New-York based Foo Inc. announced their
acquisition of Bar Corp." A broad goal of IE is to allow computation to be
done on the previously unstructured data. A more specific goal is to allow
logical reasoning to draw inferences based on the logical content of the input
data.

The significance of IE is determined by the growing amount of information
available in unstructured (i.e. without metadata) form, for instance on the
Internet. This knowledge can be made more accessible by means of
transformation into relational form, or by marking-up with XML tags. An
intelligent agent monitoring a news data feed requires IE to transform
unstructured data into something that can be reasoned with.

A typical application of IE is to scan a set of documents written in a natural
language and populate a database with the information extracted. Current
approaches to IE use natural language processing techniques that focus on very
restricted domains. For example, the Message Understanding Conference (MUC) is
a competition-based conference that focused on the following domains in the
past:

  * MUC-1 (1987), MUC-2 (1989): Naval operations messages.
  * MUC-3 (1991), MUC-4 (1992): Terrorism in Latin American countries.
  * MUC-5 (1993): Joint ventures and microelectronics domain.
  * MUC-6 (1995): News articles on management changes.
  * MUC-7 (1998): Satellite launch reports.

Natural Language texts may need to use some form of a Text simplification to
create a more easily machine readable text to extract the sentences.

Typical subtasks of IE are:

  * Named Entity Recognition: recognition of entity names (for people and organizations), place names, temporal expressions, and certain types of numerical expressions.
  * Coreference: identification chains of noun phrases that refer to the same object. For example, anaphora is a type of coreference.
  * Terminology extraction: finding the relevant terms for a given corpus
  * Relationship Extraction: identification of relations between entities, such as: 
    * PERSON works for ORGANIZATION (extracted from the sentence "Bill works for IBM.")
    * PERSON located in LOCATION (extracted from the sentence "Bill is in France.")

## Contents

  * 1 See also
  * 2 Information extraction and the World Wide Web
  * 3 Free or Open Source Information Extraction Software
  * 4 Further reading
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] See also

  * Concept mining
  * DARPA TIPSTER Program
  * Semantic translation
  * ECHELON

## [edit] Information extraction and the World Wide Web

IE has been the focus of the MUC conferences. The proliferation of the Web,
however, intensified the need for developing IE systems that help people to
cope with the enormous amount of data that is available online. Systems that
perform IE from online text, should meet the requirements of low cost,
flexibility in development and easy adaptation to new domains. MUC systems
fail to meet those criteria. Moreover, linguistic analysis performed for
unstructured text does not exploit the HTML/XML tags and layout format that
are available in online text. As a result, less linguistically intensive
approaches have been developed for IE on the Web using wrappers, which are
sets of highly accurate rules that extract the a particular page's content.

## [edit] Free or Open Source Information Extraction Software

  * General Architecture for Text Engineering "General Architecture for Text Engineering", which is bundled with a free Information Extraction system
  * OpenCalais Automated information extraction tool from Reuters (Free limited version)
  * TermFinder, online terminology extractor for EN, FR & IT - web application
  * TextRunner Part of the KnowItAll Project of the Turing Center at the University of Washington
  * Alias-I LingPipe A suite of Java libraries for the linguistic analysis of human language.
  * TermExtractor
  * CRF++ A free toolkit, implemented in C++, for various NLP tasks, including information extraction.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Sunita Sarawagi. (2008). Information extraction. FnT Databases, 1(3), 2008.

  * R. J. Mooney and R. C. Bunescu. (2005). Mining knowledge from text using information extraction. SIGKDD Explorations 7(1).

  * Ralph Grishman. (1997). Information extraction: Techniques and challenges. In Information Extraction: A Multidisciplinary Approach to an Emerging Information Technology, International Summer School, (SCIE-97), pages 10â27, 1997.

  * Claire Cardie. (1997). Empirical Methods in Information Extraction. AI Magazine, 18(4): Winter 1997, 65-80.

  * Claire Cardie. (1993). A Case-Based Approach to Knowledge Acquisition for Domain-Specific Sentence Analysis. In Proceedings of the Eleventh National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-93).

  

## [edit] External links

  * MUC
  * ACE (LDC)
  * ACE (NIST)
  * Alias-I "competition" page A listing of academic toolkits and industrial toolkits for natural language information extraction.
  * Gabor Melli's page on IE Detailed description of the information extraction task.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_extraction"

Categories: Natural language processing | Artificial intelligence

Hidden categories: Articles to be merged since December 2008 | All articles to
be merged

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Euskara
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 08:12 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



