
# Information science

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Accuracy dispute

This article appears to contradict the article
[[Category:Informatics|Category:Informatics]]. Please see discussion on the
linked talk page. Please do not remove this message until the contradictions
are resolved.  
Not to be confused with informatics or information theory.

Information science  
Portal Â· History  
General Aspects  
Information architecture Â· Information retrieval  
Information society Â· Information access  
Information management Â· Philosophy of information  
Information seeking Â· Knowledge organization  
Related fields & subfields  
Information technology Â· Informatics  
Classification Â· Bibliometrics  
Preservation Â· Cultural studies  
Categorization Â· Data modeling  
Memory Â· Computer storage  
Intellectual property Â· Intellectual freedom  
Privacy Â· Censorship  
  
<IMG>

<IMG>

The Ancient Library of Alexandria, an early form of information storage and
retrieval.

Sister project Look up information science in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
<IMG> Information science portal  
<IMG> University portal  
Information science is an interdisciplinary science primarily concerned with
the collection, classification, manipulation, storage, retrieval and
dissemination of information.[1] Practitioners within the field study the
application and usage of knowledge in organizations, along with the
interaction between people, organizations and any existing information
systems, with the aim of creating, replacing or improving information systems.
Information science is often (mistakenly) considered a branch of computer
science. However, it is actually a broad, interdisciplinary field,
incorporating not only aspects of computer science, but often diverse fields
such as cognitive science, commerce, communications, law, library science,
management, mathematics, public policy, and the social sciences.

Information science focuses on understanding problems from the perspective of
the stakeholders involved and then applying information and other technologies
as needed. In other words, it tackles systemic problems first rather than
individual pieces of technology within that system. In this respect,
information science can be seen as a response to technological determinism,
the belief that technology "develops by its own laws, that it realizes its own
potential, limited only by the material resources available, and must
therefore be regarded as an autonomous system controlling and ultimately
permeating all other subsystems of society." [2] Within information science,
attention has been given in recent years to humanâcomputer interaction,
groupware, the semantic web, value sensitive design, iterative design
processes and to the ways people generate, use and find information. Today
this field is called the Field of Information, and there are a growing number
of Schools and Colleges of Information.

Information science should not be confused with information theory, the study
of a particular mathematical concept of information, or with library science,
a field related to libraries which uses some of the principles of information
science.

## Contents

  * 1 Definitions of information science
  * 2 History
    * 2.1 Early beginnings
    * 2.2 19th century
    * 2.3 European documentation
    * 2.4 Transition to modern information science
    * 2.5 Important historical figures
  * 3 Related disciplines
  * 4 Topics in information science
    * 4.1 Bibliometrics
    * 4.2 Data modeling
    * 4.3 Document management
    * 4.4 Groupware
    * 4.5 Human-computer interaction
    * 4.6 Information architecture
    * 4.7 Information ethics
    * 4.8 Information retrieval
    * 4.9 Information society
    * 4.10 Information systems
    * 4.11 Intellectual property
    * 4.12 Knowledge management
    * 4.13 Knowledge engineering
    * 4.14 Personal information management
    * 4.15 Semantic web
    * 4.16 Usability engineering
    * 4.17 User-centered design
    * 4.18 XML
  * 5 Research
    * 5.1 Research methods
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 Further reading
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Definitions of information science

Some authors treat informatics as a synonym for information science,
especially related to the concept developed by A. I. Mikhailov and other
soviet authors in the mid sixties, which suggested that informatics is a
discipline related to the study of Scientific Information[3]. Because of the
rapidly evolving, interdisciplinary nature of informatics, a precise meaning
of the term "informatics" is presently difficult to pin down. Regional
differences and international terminology complicate the problem. Some people
note that much of what is called "Informatics" today was once called
"Information Science" at least in fields such as Medical Informatics. However
when library scientists began also to use the phrase "Information Science" to
refer to their work, the term informatics emerged in the United States as a
response by computer scientists to distinguish their work from that of library
science, and in Britain as a term for a science of information that studies
natural, as well as artificial or engineered, information-processing
systems.[citation needed]

Information Science consists of having the knowledge and understanding on how
to collect, classify, manipulate, store, retrieve and disseminate any type of
information.

## [edit] History

### [edit] Early beginnings

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz, a German polymath who wrote primarily in Latin
and French. His fields of study were Metaphysics, Mathematics, Theodicy.

Information science, in studying the collection, classification, manipulation,
storage, retrieval and dissemination of information has origins in the common
stock of human knowledge. Information analysis has been carried out by
scholars at least as early as the time of the Abyssinian Empire (during the
time of King Solomon) with the emergence of cultural depositories, what is
today known as libraries and archives.[4] Institutionally, information science
emerged in the 19th Century along with many other social science disciplines.
As a science, however, it finds its institutional roots in the history of
science, beginning with publication of the first issues of ââPhilosophical
Transactions,ââ generally considered the first scientific journal, in 1665
by the Royal Society (London).

The institutionalization of science occurred throughout the 18th Century. In
1731, Benjamin Franklin established the Library Company of Philadelphia, the
first âpublicâ library, which quickly expanded beyond the realm of books
and became a center of scientific experiment, and which hosted public
exhibitions of scientific experiments.[5] Academie de Chirurgia (Paris)
published ââMemoires pour les Chirurgiens,ââ generally considered to
be the first medical journal, in 1736. The American Philosophical Society,
patterned on the Royal Society (London), was founded in Philadelphia in 1743.
As numerous other scientific journals and societies are founded, Alois
Senefelder develops the concept of lithography for use in mass printing work
in Germany in 1796.

### [edit] 19th century

<IMG>

<IMG>

Joseph Marie Jacquard

By the 19th Century the first signs of information science emerged as separate
and distinct from other sciences and social sciences but in conjunction with
communication and computation. In 1801, Joseph Marie Jacquard invented a
punched card system to control operations of the cloth weaving loom in France.
It was the first use of "memory storage of patterns" system.[6] As chemistry
journals emerged throughout the 1820s and 1830s,[7] Charles Babbage developed
his "difference engine," the first step towards the modern computer, in 1822
and his "analytical engineâ by 1834. By 1843 Richard Hoe developed the
rotary press, and in 1844 Samuel Morse sent the first public telegraph
message. By 1848 William F. Poole begins the ââIndex to Periodical
Literature,ââ the first general periodical literature index in the US.

In 1854 George Boole published ââAn Investigation into Laws of
Thought...,ââ which lays the foundations for Boolean algebra, which is
later used in information retrieval.[8] In 1860 a congress is held at
Karlsruhe Technische Hochschule to discuss the feasibility of establishing a
systematic and rational nomenclature for chemistry. The congress does not
reach any conclusive results, but several key participants return home with
Stanislao Cannizzaro's outline (1858), which ultimately convinces them of the
validity of his scheme for calculating atomic weights.[9]

By 1865 the Smithsonian Institution began a catalog of current scientific
papers, which became the ââInternational Catalogue of Scientific
Papersââ in 1902.[10] The following year the Royal Society began
publication of its ââCatalogue of Papersââ in London. In 1866
Christopher Sholes, Carlos Glidden, and S. W. Soule produced the first
practical typewriter. By 1872 Lord Kelvin devised an analogue computer to
predict the tides, and by 1875 Frank Stephen Baldwin was granted the first US
patent for a practical calculating machine that performs four arithmetic
functions.[7] Alexander Graham Bell and Thomas Edison invented the phonograph
and telephone in 1876 and 1877 respectively, and the American Library
Association was founded in Philadelphia. In 1879 ââIndex Medicusââ was
first issued by the Library of the Surgeon General, U.S. Army, with John Shaw
Billings as librarian, and later the library issues ââIndex
Catalogue,ââ which achieved an international reputation as the most
complete catalog of medical literature.[11]

### [edit] European documentation

<IMG>

<IMG>

Paul Otlet, a founder of modern information science, also known as
"Documentation"

The discipline of European Documentation, which marks the earliest theoretical
foundations of modern information science, emerged in the late part of the
19th Century together with several more scientific indexes whose purpose was
to organize scholarly literature. Most information science historians cite
Paul Otlet and Henri La Fontaine as the fathers of information science with
the founding of the International Institute of Bibliography (IIB) in 1895.[12]
However, âinformation scienceâ as a term is not popularly used in academia
until after World War II.[13]

Documentalists emphasized the utilitarian integration of technology and
technique toward specific social goals. According to Ronald Day, âAs an
organized system of techniques and technologies, documentation was understood
as a player in the historical development of global organization in modernity
â indeed, a major player inasmuch as that organization was dependent on the
organization and transmission of information.â[14] Otlet and Lafontaine (who
won the Nobel Prize in 1913) not only envisioned later technical innovations
but also projected a global vision for information and information
technologies that speaks directly to postwar visions of a global
âinformation society.â Otlet and Lafontaine established numerous
organizations dedicated to standardization, bibliography, international
associations, and consequently, international cooperation. These organizations
were fundamental for ensuring international production in commerce,
information, communication and modern economic development, and they later
found their global form in such institutions as the League of Nations and the
United Nations. Otlet designed the Universal Decimal Classification, based on
Melville Deweyâs decimal classification system. [15]

Although he lived decades before computers and networks emerged, what he
discussed prefigured what ultimately became the World Wide Web. His vision of
a great network of knowledge was centered on documents and included the
notions of hyperlinks, search engines, remote access, and social networks.
(Obviously these notions were described by different names.)

Otlet not only imagined that all the world's knowledge should be interlinked
and made available remotely to anyone (what he called an International Network
for Universal Documentation), he also proceeded to build a structured document
collection that involved standardized paper sheets and cards filed in custom-
designed cabinets according to an ever-expanding ontology, an indexing staff
which culled information worldwide from as diverse sources as possible, and a
commercial information retrieval service which answered written requests by
copying relevant information from index cards. Users of this service were even
warned if their query was likely to produce more than 50 results per
search.[15] By 1937 documentation had formally been institutionalized, as
evidenced by the founding of the American Documentation Institute (ADI), later
called the American Society for Information Science and Technology.

### [edit] Transition to modern information science

<IMG>

<IMG>

Vannevar Bush, a famous information scientist, ca. 1940-44

With the 1950s came increasing awareness of the potential of automatic devices
for literature searching and information storage and retrieval. As these
concepts grew in magnitude and potential, so did the variety of information
science interests. By the 1960s and 70s, there was a move from batch
processing to online modes, from mainframe to mini and micro computers.
Additionally, traditional boundaries among disciplines began to fade and many
information science scholars joined with library programs. They further made
themselves multidisciplinary by incorporating disciplines in the sciences,
humanities and social sciences, as well as other professional programs, such
as law and medicine in their curriculum. By the 1980s, large databases, such
as Grateful Med at the National Library of Medicine, and user-oriented
services such as Dialog and Compuserve, were for the first time accessible by
individuals from their personal computers. The 1980s also saw the emergence of
numerous special interest groups to respond to the changes. By the end of the
decade, special interest groups were available involving non-print media,
social sciences, energy and the environment, and community information
systems. Today, information science largely examines technical bases, social
consequences, and theoretical understanding of online databases, widespread
use of databases in government, industry, and education, and the development
of the Internet and World Wide Web. [16]

### [edit] Important historical figures

  * Tim Berners-Lee
  * John Shaw Billings
  * George Boole
  * Suzanne Briet
  * Michael Buckland
  * Vannevar Bush
  * Melville Dewey
  * Luciano Floridi
  * Henri La Fontaine

  * Frederick Kilgour
  * Gottfried Leibniz
  * Alexander Ivanovich Mikhailov
  * S. R. Ranganathan
  * Seymour Lubetzky
  * Wilhelm Ostwald
  * Paul Otlet
  * Gerald Salton
  * Jesse Shera
  * Warren Weaver

  
## [edit] Related disciplines

There are many fields which claims to be "sciences" or "disciplines" which are
difficult to distinguish from each other and from information science. Some of
them are:

  * Archival science
  * Communication studies
  * Computer science
  * Documentation (field)
  * Informatics
  * Information management
  * Information systems research
  * Internet studies
  * Knowledge management
  * Library science
  * Media studies
  * Scientometrics

## [edit] Topics in information science

<IMG>

<IMG>

"Knowledge Map of Information Science" from Zins,Chaim, Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 17 January 2007

### [edit] Bibliometrics

Bibliometrics is a set of quantitative methods used to study or measure texts
and information and is one of the largest research areas within information
science.

Bibliometric methods include the journal Impact Factor, a relatively crude but
useful method of estimating the impact of the research published within a
journal, in comparison to other journals in the same field. Bibliometrics is
often used to evaluate or compare the impact of groups of researchers within a
field. In addition it is also used to describe the development of fields,
particularly new areas of research.

### [edit] Data modeling

Data modeling is the process of creating a data model by applying a data model
theory to create a data model instance. A data model theory is a formal data
model description. See database model for a list of current data model
theories.

When data modelling, we are structuring and organizing data. These data
structures are then typically implemented in a database management system. In
addition to defining and organizing the data, data modeling will impose
(implicitly or explicitly) constraints or limitations on the data placed
within the structure.

Managing large quantities of structured and unstructured data is a primary
function of information systems. Data models describe structured data for
storage in data management systems such as relational databases. They
typically do not describe unstructured data, such as word processing
documents, email messages, pictures, digital audio, and video.

### [edit] Document management

Document management and engineering is a computer system (or set of computer
programs) used to track and store electronic documents and/or images of paper
documents. Document management systems have some overlap with Content
Management Systems, Enterprise Content Management Systems, Digital Asset
Management, Document imaging, Workflow systems and Records Management systems.

### [edit] Groupware

Groupware is software designed to help people get involved in a common task to
achieve their goals. Collaborative software is the basis for computer
supported cooperative work.

Such software systems as email, calendaring, text chat, wiki belong in this
category. It has been suggested that Metcalfe's law â the more people who
use something, the more valuable it becomes â applies to such software.

The more general term social software applies to systems used outside the
workplace, for example, online dating services and social networks like
Friendster. The study of computer-supported collaboration includes the study
of this software and social phenomena associated with it.

### [edit] Human-computer interaction

Human-computer interaction (HCI), alternatively man-machine interaction (MMI)
or computerâhuman interaction (CHI), is the study of interaction between
people (users) and computers. It is an interdisciplinary subject, relating
computer science with many other fields of study and research. Interaction
between users and computers occurs at the user interface (or simply
interface), which includes both software and hardware, for example, general
purpose computer peripherals and large-scale mechanical systems such as
aircraft and power plants.

### [edit] Information architecture

Information architecture is the practice of structuring information (knowledge
or data) for a purpose. These are often structured according to their context
in user interactions or larger databases. The term is most commonly applied to
Web development, but also applies to disciplines outside of a strict Web
context, such as programming and technical writing. Information architecture
is considered an element of user experience design.

The term information architecture describes a specialized skill set which
relates to the management of information and employment of informational
tools. It has a significant degree of association with the library sciences.
Many library schools now teach information architecture.

An alternate definition of information architecture exists within the context
of information system design, in which information architecture refers to data
modeling and the analysis and design of the information in the system,
concentrating on entities and their interdependencies. Data modeling depends
on abstraction; the relationships between the pieces of data is of more
interest than the particulars of individual records, though cataloging
possible values is a common technique. The usability of human-facing systems,
and standards compliance of internal ones, are paramount.

### [edit] Information ethics

Information ethics is the field that investigates the ethical issues arising
from the development and application of information technologies. It provides
a critical framework for considering moral issues concerning informational
privacy, moral agency (e.g. whether artificial agents may be moral), new
environmental issues (especially how agents should one behave in the
infosphere), problems arising from the life-cycle (creation, collection,
recording, distribution, processing, etc.) of information (especially
ownership and copyright, digital divide). Information Ethics is therefore
strictly related to the fields of computer ethics (Floridi, 1999) and the
philosophy of information.

Dilemmas regarding the life of information are becoming increasingly important
in a society that is defined as "the information society". Information
transmission and literacy are essential concerns in establishing an ethical
foundation that promotes fair, equitable, and responsible practices.
Information ethics broadly examines issues related to, among other things,
ownership, access, privacy, security, and community.

Information technology affects fundamental rights involving copyright
protection, intellectual freedom, accountability, and security.

Professional codes offer a basis for making ethical decisions and applying
ethical solutions to situations involving information provision and use which
reflect an organizationâs commitment to responsible information service.
Evolving information formats and needs require continual reconsideration of
ethical principles and how these codes are applied. Considerations regarding
information ethics influence personal decisions, professional practice, and
public policy.

### [edit] Information retrieval

Information retrieval (IR), often studied in conjunction with information
storage, is the science of searching for information in documents, searching
for documents themselves, searching for metadata which describe documents, or
searching within databases, whether relational stand-alone databases or
hypertextually-networked databases such as the World Wide Web. There is a
common confusion, however, between data retrieval, document retrieval,
information retrieval, and text retrieval, and each of these has its own
bodies of literature, theory, praxis and technologies. IR is, like most
nascent fields, interdisciplinary, based on computer science, mathematics,
library science, information science, cognitive psychology, linguistics,
statistics, physics.

Automated IR systems are used to reduce information overload and to scale
indexing and access. Many universities and public libraries use IR systems to
provide access to books, journals, and other documents. IR systems are often
related to digital objects and query. Queries are formal statements of
information needs that are put to an IR system by the user. An object is an
entity which keeps or stores information in a database. User queries are
matched to objects stored in the database. A document is, therefore, a data
object. Retrieval order is based on similarity of the query to the object and,
more recently, to a level of importance of the document, such as PageRank.
Sometimes the documents themselves are not kept or stored directly in the IR
system, but are instead represented in the system by document surrogates.

### [edit] Information society

Information society is a society in which the creation, distribution,
diffusion, use, and manipulation of information is a significant economic,
political, and cultural activity. The knowledge economy is its economic
counterpart whereby wealth is created through the economic exploitation of
understanding.

Specific to this kind of society is the central position information
technology has for production, economy, and society at large. Information
society is seen as the successor to industrial society. Closely related
concepts are the post-industrial society (Daniel Bell), post-fordism, post-
modern society, knowledge society, Telematic Society, Information Revolution,
and network society (Manuel Castells).

### [edit] Information systems

An information system is a technologically implemented medium for recording,
storing, and disseminating linguistic expressions, as well as for drawing
conclusions from such expressions.

The technology used for implementing information systems by no means has to be
computer technology. A notebook in which one lists certain items of interest
is, according to that definition, an information system. Likewise, there are
computer applications that do not comply with this definition of information
systems. Embedded systems are an example. A computer application that is
integrated into clothing or even the human body does not generally deal with
linguistic expressions. One could, however, try to generalize Langefors'
definition so as to cover more recent developments.

### [edit] Intellectual property

Intellectual property (IP) is a disputed umbrella term for various legal
entitlements which attach to certain names, written and recorded media, and
inventions. The holders of these legal entitlements are generally entitled to
exercise various exclusive rights in relation to the subject matter of the IP.
The term intellectual property links the idea that this subject matter is the
product of the mind or the intellect together with the political and
economical notion of property. The close linking of these two ideas is a
matter of some controversy. It is criticised as "a fad" by Mark Lemley of
Stanford Law School and by Richard Stallman of the Free Software Foundation as
an "overgeneralization" and "at best a catch-all to lump together disparate
laws".[17]

Intellectual property laws and enforcement vary widely from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction. There are inter-governmental efforts to harmonise them through
international treaties such as the 1994 World Trade Organization (WTO)
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs),
while other treaties may facilitate registration in more than one jurisdiction
at a time. Enforcement of copyright, disagreements over medical and software
patents, and the dispute regarding the nature of "intellectual property" as a
cohesive notion[17] have so far prevented the emergence of a cohesive
international system.

### [edit] Knowledge management

Knowledge management comprises a range of practices used by organizations to
identify, create, represent, and distribute knowledge for reuse, awareness,
and learning across the organizations.

Knowledge Management programs are typically tied to organizational objectives
and are intended to lead to the achievement of specific outcomes, such as
shared intelligence, improved performance, competitive advantage, or higher
levels of innovation.

Knowledge transfer (one aspect of Knowledge Management) has always existed in
one form or another. Examples include: on-the-job peer discussions, formal
apprenticeship, corporate libraries, professional training, and mentoring
programs. However, since the late twentieth century, additional technology has
been applied to this task.

### [edit] Knowledge engineering

Knowledge engineering is also related to mathematical logic, as well as
strongly involved in cognitive science and socio-cognitive engineering where
the knowledge is produced by socio-cognitive aggregates (mainly humans) and is
structured according to our understanding of how human reasoning and logic
works. Knowledge engineering (KE), often studied in conjunction with knowledge
management, refers to the building, maintaining and development of knowledge-
based systems. It has a great deal in common with software engineering, and is
related to many computer science domains such as artificial intelligence,
databases, data mining, expert systems, decision support systems and
geographic information systems.

### [edit] Personal information management

Personal information management (PIM) as a field of study covers many of the
same areas as information science but approaches the study of information from
the perspective of the whole person. How is information in various forms
(paper documents, wikis, blogs, email, etc.) used by people in support of
their efforts to understand and effect useful change in their world? How can
tools of information management help?

### [edit] Semantic web

Semantic Web is an evolving extension of the World Wide Web in which web
content can be expressed not only in natural language, but also in a form that
can be understood, interpreted and used by software agents, thus permitting
them to find, share and integrate information more easily.[18] It derives from
W3C director Tim Berners-Lee's vision of the Web as a universal medium for
data, information, and knowledge exchange.

At its core, the Semantic Web comprises a philosophy,[19] a set of design
principles,[20] collaborative working groups, and a variety of enabling
technologies. Some elements of the Semantic Web are expressed as prospective
future possibilities that have yet to be implemented or realized.[21] Other
elements of the Semantic Web are expressed in formal specifications.[22] Some
of these include Resource Description Framework (RDF), a variety of data
interchange formats (e.g RDF/XML, N3, Turtle, and notations such as RDF Schema
(RDFS) and the Web Ontology Language (OWL). All of which are intended to
formally describe concepts, terms, and relationships within a given problem
domain.

### [edit] Usability engineering

Usability engineering is a subset of human factors that is specific to
computer science and is concerned with the question of how to design software
that is easy to use. It is closely related to the field of human-computer
interaction and industrial design. The term "usability engineering" (UE) (in
contrast to other names of the discipline, like interaction design or user
experience design) tends to describe a pragmatic approach to user interface
design which emphasizes empirical methods and operational definitions of user
requirements for tools. Extending as far as International Organisation for
Standardisation-approved definitions usability is considered a context-
dependent agreement of the effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction with
which specific users should be able to perform tasks. Advocates of this
approach engage in task analysis, then prototype interface designs and conduct
usability tests. On the basis of such tests, the technology is (ideally) re-
designed or (occasionally) the operational targets for user performance are
revised.

### [edit] User-centered design

User-centered design is a design philosophy and a process in which the needs,
wants, and limitations of the end user of an interface or document are given
extensive attention at each stage of the design process. User-centered design
can be characterized as a multi-stage problem solving process that not only
requires designers to analyze and foresee how users are likely to use an
interface, but to test the validity of their assumptions with regards to user
behaviour in real world tests with actual users. Such testing is necessary as
it is often very difficult for the designers of an interface to understand
intuitively what a first-time user of their design experiences, and what each
user's learning curve may look like.

The chief difference from other interface design philosophies is that user-
centered design tries to optimize the user interface around how people can,
want, or need to work, rather than forcing the users to change how they work
to accommodate the system or function.

### [edit] XML

XML is a W3C(abbreviated WWW or W3)-recommended general-purpose markup
language that supports a wide variety of applications. XML languages or
'dialects' may be designed by anyone and may be processed by conforming
software. XML is also designed to be reasonably human-legible, and to this
end, terseness was not considered essential in its structure. XML is a
simplified subset of Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML). Its primary
purpose is to facilitate the sharing of data across different information
systems, particularly systems connected via the Internet[23]. Formally defined
languages based on XML (such as RSS, MathML, GraphML, XHTML, Scalable Vector
Graphics, MusicXML and thousands of other examples) allow diverse software to
reliably understand information formatted and passed in these languages.

## [edit] Research

Many universities have entire colleges, departments or schools or devoted to
the study of information science, while numerous information science scholars
can be found in disciplines such as communication, computer science, law,
library science, and sociology. Several institutions have formed an I-School
Caucus (see List of I-Schools), but there are numerous others with
comprehensive information foci.

### [edit] Research methods

Information science has similar research methods to computer science and
social sciences:

Archival research

    Facts or factual evidences from a variety of records are compiled.
Computational complexity and structure

    Algorithmic and graphic methods are used to explore the complexity of information systems, retrieval and storage.
Content analysis

    The contents of books and mass media are analyzed to study how people communicate and the messages people talk or write about.
Case study

    A specific set of circumstances or a group (the 'case') is analyzed according to a specific goal of study. Generally, case studies are used to characterize a trend or development; they have weak generalizability.
Historical method

    This involves a continuous and systematic search for the information and knowledge about past events related to the life of a person, a group, society, or the world.
Interviews

    The researcher obtains data by interviewing people. If the interview is non-structured, the researcher leaves it to the interviewee (also referred to as the respondent or the informant) to guide the conversation.
Life history

    This is the study of the personal life of a person. Through a series of interviews, the researcher can probe into the decisive moments in their life or the various influences on their life.
Longitudinal study

    This is an extensive examination of a specific group over a long period of time.
Observation

    Using data from the senses, one records information about a social phenomenon or behavior. Qualitative research relies heavily on observation, although it is in a highly disciplined form.
Participant observation

    As the name implies, the researcher goes to the field (usually a community), lives with the people for some time, and participates in their activities in order to know and feel their culture.
## [edit] See also

  * Portal:Library and information science
  * Informatics
  * Information technology â The use of computers and technology to manage information.
  * Enterprise content management â Strategies and technologies for managing content, documents and information
  * International Federation for Information Processing â Global body for informatics.
  * Personal information management (PIM)
  * Philosophy of information
  * Informative modelling

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Merriam-Webster and American Heritage Dictionary.
  2. ^ Web Dictionary of Cybernetics and Systems
  3. ^ Mikhailov, A.I., Chernyl, A.I., and Gilyarevskii, R.S. (1966) "Informatika â novoe nazvanie teorii nauÄnoj informacii." NauÄno tehniÄeskaja informacija, 12, pp. 35â39.
  4. ^ Clark, John Willis. The Care Of Books: An Essay On The Development Of Libraries And Their Fittings, From The Earliest Times To The End Of The Eighteenth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1901
  5. ^ Korty, Margaret Barton. âBenjamin Franklin and Eighteenth Century American Libraries.â ââTransactions of the American Philosophical Societyââ December vol. 55.9 (1965)
  6. ^ Reichman, F. (1961). Notched Cards. In R. Shaw (Ed.), The state of the library art (Volume 4, Part 1, pp. 11-55). New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers, The State University, Graduate School of Library Service
  7. ^ a b Emard, J. P. (1976). An information science chronology in perspective. Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science , 2(8), 51-56
  8. ^ Smith, E. S. (1993). On the shoulders of giants: From Boole to Shannon to Taube: The origins and development of computerized information from the mid-19th century to the present. Information Technology and Libraries , 12(2), 217-226
  9. ^ Skolnik, H. (1976). Milestones in chemical information science: Award symposium on contributions of the Division of Chemical Literature (Information) to the Chemical Society. Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Science , 16(4), 187-193
  10. ^ Adkinson, B. W. (1976). Federal governmentâs support of information activities: A historical sketch. Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science, 2(8), 24-26
  11. ^ Schullian, D. M., & Rogers, F. B. (1958). The National Library of Medicine. I. Library Quarterly, 28(1), 1-17
  12. ^ Rayward, W. B. (1994). International federation for information and documentation. In W. A. Wiegand, & D. G. David Jr. (Eds.), The encyclopedia of library history (pp. 290-294). New York: Garland Publishing, Inc.
  13. ^ Day, Ronald. ââModern Invention of Information.ââ Carbondale, Il.: Southern Illinois University Press, 2001: 7
  14. ^ Day, Ronald. ââModern Invention of Information.ââ Carbondale, Il.: Southern Illinois University Press, 2001: 7
  15. ^ a b Day, Ronald. ââModern Invention of Information.ââ Carbondale, Il.: Southern Illinois University Press, 2001:
  16. ^ ASIST History
  17. ^ a b Stallman, Richard (2004). "Did You Say "Intellectual Property"? It's a Seductive Mirage". http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/not-ipr.xhtml. Retrieved on 2007-04-17.
  18. ^ W3C Semantic Web FAQ
  19. ^ Semantic Web Activity Statement
  20. ^ Design Issues for the World Wide Web
  21. ^ W3C Semantic Web FAQ
  22. ^ W3C Semantic Web Activity
  23. ^ Bray, Tim; Jean Paoli, C. M. Sperberg-McQueen, Eve Maler, FranÃ§ois Yergeau (September 2006). "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Fourth Edition) - Origin and Goals". World Wide Web Consortium. http://www.w3.org/TR/2006/REC-xml-20060816/#sec-origin-goals. Retrieved on October 29.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Khosrow-Pour, Mehdi (2005-03-22). Encyclopedia of Information Science and Technology. Idea Group Reference. ISBN 159140553X.

## [edit] External links

  * Knowledge Map of Information Science
  * LIBRES - Library and Information Science Research Electronic Journal - Curtin University of Technology, Perth, Western Australia
  * Journal of Information Science
  * What Has Information Science Contributed to the World?
  * Digital Library of Information Science and Technology open access archive for the Information Sciences
  * Current Information Science Research at U.S. Geological Survey
  * Introduction to Information Science
  * The Nitecki Trilogy
  * Information science at the University of California at Berkeley in the 1960s: a memoir of student days
  * Chronology of Information Science and Technology

v â¢ d â¢ e

Fields within the social sciences  
Anthropology Â· Communications Â· Economics Â· Education Â· Gerontology Â·
History Â· Human geography Â· Information science Â· Law Â· Linguistics Â·
Management Â· Political science Â· Psychology Â· Sociology  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_science"

Categories: Information science | Interdisciplinary fields | Social sciences

Hidden categories: Articles contradicting other articles | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * PortuguÃªs
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 22:55.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



