
# Collaborative filtering

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2008)  
Collaborative filtering (CF) is the process of filtering for information or
patterns using techniques involving collaboration among multiple agents,
viewpoints, data sources, etc. Applications of collaborative filtering
typically involve very large data sets. Collaborative filtering methods have
been applied to many different kinds of data including sensing and monitoring
data - such as in mineral exploration, environmental sensing over large areas
or multiple sensors; financial data - such as financial service institutions
that integrate many financial sources; or in electronic commerce and web 2.0
applications where the focus is on user data, etc. The remainder of this
discussion focuses on collaborative filtering for user data, although some of
the methods and approaches may apply to the other major applications as well.

The method of making automatic predictions (filtering) about the interests of
a user by collecting taste information from many users (collaborating). The
underlying assumption of CF approach is that those who agreed in the past tend
to agree again in the future. For example, a collaborative filtering or
recommendation system for music tastes could make predictions about which
music a user should like given a partial list of that user's tastes (likes or
dislikes). Note that these predictions are specific to the user, but use
information gleaned from many users. This differs from the simpler approach of
giving an average (non-specific) score for each item of interest, for example
based on its number of votes.

## Contents

  * 1 Methodology
  * 2 History
  * 3 Types
    * 3.1 Active filtering
      * 3.1.1 Advantages
      * 3.1.2 Disadvantages
    * 3.2 Passive filtering
    * 3.3 Item based filtering
  * 4 Explicit versus implicit filtering
  * 5 Applications
    * 5.1 In commercial systems
    * 5.2 In non-commercial systems
  * 6 Innovations in Collaborative Filtering
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links
    * 9.1 Software libraries

  
## [edit] Methodology

Collaborative filtering systems usually take two steps:

  1. Look for users who share the same rating patterns with the active user (the user whom the prediction is for).
  2. Use the ratings from those like-minded users found in step 1 to calculate a prediction for the active user

Alternatively, item-based collaborative filtering popularized by Amazon.com
(users who bought x also bought y) and first proposed in the context of
rating-based collaborative filtering by Vucetic and Obradovic in 2000,
proceeds in an item-centric manner:

  1. Build an item-item matrix determining relationships between pairs of items
  2. Using the matrix, and the data on the current user, infer his taste

See, for example, the Slope One item-based collaborative filtering family.

Another form of collaborative filtering can be based on implicit observations
of normal user behavior (as opposed to the artificial behavior imposed by a
rating task). In these systems you observe what a user has done together with
what all users have done (what music they have listened to, what items they
have bought) and use that data to predict the user's behavior in the future or
to predict how a user might like to behave if only they were given a chance.
These predictions then have to be filtered through business logic to determine
how these predictions might affect what a business system ought to do. It is,
for instance, not useful to offer to sell somebody some music if they already
have demonstrated that they own that music.

In the age of information explosion such techniques can prove very useful as
the number of items in only one category (such as music, movies, books, news,
web pages) have become so large that a single person cannot possibly view them
all in order to select relevant ones. Relying on a scoring or rating system
which is averaged across all users ignores specific demands of a user, and is
particularly poor in tasks where there is large variation in interest, for
example in the recommendation of music. Obviously, other methods to combat
information explosion exist such as web search, data clustering, and more.

## [edit] History

Collaborative filtering stems from the earlier system of information
filtering, where relevant information is brought to the attention of the user
by observing patterns in previous behaviour and building a user profile. This
system was essentially unable to help with exploration of the web and suffered
from the cold-start problem that new users had to build up tendencies before
the filtering was effective.

The first system to use collaborative filtering was the Information Tapestry
project at Xerox PARC [1]. This system allowed users to find documents based
on previous comments by other users. There were many problems with this system
as it only worked for small groups of people and had to be accessed through
word specific queries which largely defeated the purpose of collaborative
filtering.

USENET Net news furthered collaborative filtering[dubious â discuss] such
that it was available for a mass scale of users while having a simpler method
for accessing articles. The system allowed users to rate material based on
popularity, which then allowed other users to search for articles based on
these ratings.

One of the largest early collaborative filtering services for music
recommendations widely available on the World Wide Web was Firefly, which
evolved from early MIT Media Lab research projects. Firefly was bought by
Microsoft in 1998. The service itself was closed down in 1999 with much of its
technology and staff helping to create Microsoft Passport.

## [edit] Types

### [edit] Active filtering

Active filtering is a method that in recent years has become increasingly
popular due to an ever growing base of information available to users of the
World Wide Web. With an exponentially growing amount of information being
added to the Internet, finding efficient and valuable information is becoming
more difficult. In recent years a basic search for information using the World
Wide Web turns out thousands of results and a high percentage of this
information is not effective and â more often than not â irrelevant as
well. There are a large number of databases and search engines in the market
today to use for searches but a majority of the population is not familiar
with all the options available. This is where active filtering comes into
effect.

Active filtering differs from other methods of collaborative filtering because
it uses a peer-to-peer approach. This means that it is a system where peers,
coworkers, and people with similar interests rate products, reports, and other
material objects, also sharing this information over the web for other people
to see. It is a system based on the fact that people want to share consumer
information with the other peers. The users of active filtering use lists of
commonly used links to send the information over the web where others can view
it and use the ratings of the products to make their own decisions.

Active collaborative filtering can be useful to many people in many
situations. This type of filtering can be extremely important and effective in
a situation where a non-guided web search produces thousands of results that
are not useful or effective for the person locating the information. In cases
where people are not comfortable or knowledgeable about the array of databases
that are available to them, active filtering is very useful and effective.

#### [edit] Advantages

There are many advantages to using or viewing an Active collaborative
filtering. One of these advantages is an actual rating given to something of
interest by a person who has viewed the topic or product of interest. This
produces a reasonable explanation and rank from a reliable source, being the
person who has come into contact with the product. Another advantage of Active
filtering is the fact that the people want to and ultimately do provide
information regarding the matter at hand.

#### [edit] Disadvantages

There are a few disadvantages of active filtering. One is that the opinion may
be biased. Also, as providing feedback requires action by the user, less data
may be available than with a passive approach, and user expectations may not
be met. In addition, small amounts of highly favorable opinions might result
in a bloated evaluation for an item that place it unrealistically amongst
other items with long standing evaluations.

One of the main characteristics in Collaborative Filtering, compared to e.g.
Content-Based Filtering, is that the method knows nothing about the items'
true content or what they are about. This means that they only rely on
preference values, such as ratings to generate the recommendations. This means
that performance of penetration of each item is highly dependent on other
users' ratings and might introduce averaging effects. Averaging effects cause
the overall most popular items to be recommended more often which means that
they will be consumed and rated more frequently as a result.

Two other issues are generally well known and often associated with
collaborative filtering: the First-Rater Problem and Cold-Start Problem. The
First-Rater problem is caused by new items in the system that understandably
have not yet received any ratings from any users. The system is therefore
unable to generate semantic interconnections to these items and therefore are
never recommended. Similarly, the Cold-Start Problem is caused by new users in
the system which have not submitted any ratings. Without any information about
the user the system is not able to guess the user's preferences and generate
recommendations until a few items have been rated.

### [edit] Passive filtering

A method of collaborative filtering that is thought to have great potential in
the future is passive filtering, which collects information implicitly. A web
browser is used to record a userâs preferences by following and measuring
their actions. These implicit filters are then used to determine what else the
user will like and recommend potential items of interest. Implicit filtering
relies on the actions of users to determine a value rating for specific
content, such as:

  * Purchasing an item
  * Repeatedly using, saving, printing an item
  * Referring or linking to a site
  * Number of times queried

An important feature of passive collaborative filtering is using the time
aspect to determine whether a user is scanning a document or fully reading the
material. The greatest strength of the system is that it takes away certain
variables from the analysis that would normally be present in active
filtering. For example, only certain types of people will take the time to
rate a site, in passive collaborative filtering anyone accessing the site has
automatically given data.

### [edit] Item based filtering

Item based filtering is another method of collaborative filtering in which
items are rated and used as parameters instead of users. This type of
filtering uses the ratings to group various items together in groups so
consumers can compare them as well as a rating scale that is available to
manufacturers so they can locate where their product stands in the market in a
consumer based rating scale.

Through this method of filtering, users or user groups use and test the
product and give it a rating that is relevant to the product and the product
class in which it falls. These users test many products and with the results,
the products are classified based on the information which the rating holds.
The products are used and tested by the same user or group in order to get an
accurate rating and eliminate some of the error that is possible in the tests
that take place under this type of filtering.

## [edit] Explicit versus implicit filtering

Within active and passive filtering there are explicit and implicit methods
for determining user preferences. Explicit collection of user preferences
requires the evaluator to indicate a value for the content on a rating scale.
This creates a cognitive aspect to collaborative filtering, but can mean that
the feedback received is more accurate. Implicit collection does not involve
the direct input of opinion by the user, but instead it is assumed that their
opinion is implied by their actions. This reduces variability amongst users
and reduces the demand on the user, which can mean that much more data is
available. However, this behaviour data does not necessarily accurately
represent the user's true opinion of an item.

## [edit] Applications

### [edit] In commercial systems

Commercial sites that implement collaborative filtering systems include:

  * Amazon
  * Amie Street
  * Barnes and Noble
  * Baynote
  * ChoiceStream
  * Collarity
  * Digg.com
  * half.ebay.com
  * Heeii
  * Hollywood Video
  * iLike \- music
  * Internet Movie Database \- movies
  * iTunes \- music
  * Last.fm \- music
  * LibraryThing \- books
  * Musicmatch
  * MyStrands \- developer of social recommendation technologies
  * Netflix \- In order to improve its algorithm Netflix has launched a competition, the Netflix Prize.
  * StumbleUpon \- websites
  * Threadless \- T-shirt
  * TiVo
  * ulike.net

### [edit] In non-commercial systems

Non-commercial sites that implement collaborative filtering systems include:

Service Type  
AmphetaRate RSS articles  
Everyone's a Critic movies  
GiveALink.org websites  
Gnomoradio music (free)  
Musicmobs music  
Rate Your Music music  
## [edit] Innovations in Collaborative Filtering

  * New algorithms have been developed for CF as a result of the NetFlix prize.
  * Cross-System Collaborative Filtering where user profiles across multiple recommender systems are combined in a privacy preserving manner.
  * Robust Collaborative Filtering, where recommendation is stable towards efforts of manipulation. This research area is still active and not completely solved.[2]

## [edit] See also

  * Attention Profiling Mark-up Language (APML)
  * Cold start
  * Collaborative search engine
  * Collective intelligence
  * Customer engagement
  * Preference elicitation
  * Recommendation system
  * Reputation system
  * Social translucence
  * The Long Tail

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Goldberg, David; David Nichols, Brain M. Oki, Douglas Terry (1992). "Using collaborative filtering to weave an information tapestry". Communications of the ACM 35 (12): 61â70. doi:10.1145/138859.138867. ISSN 0001-0782.
  2. ^ http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1297240

## [edit] External links

<IMG>

This section may contain lists of external links or see also entries
discouraged by Wikipedia's Manual of Style. Please help integrate this content
into the body of the article using in-text citations.  
  * Collaborative Filtering Resources by Jun Wang
  * Toward the next generation of recommender systems: a survey of the state-of-the-art and possible extensions. Adomavicius, G. and Tuzhilin, A. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 06.2005
  * Evaluating collaborative filtering recommender systems (DOI: 10.1145/963770.963772)
  * GroupLens research papers. GroupLens is one of the research labs that did a lot of pioneering research in collaborative filtering.
  * Content-Boosted Collaborative Filtering for Improved Recommendations. Prem Melville, Raymond J. Mooney, and Ramadass Nagarajan
  * A collection of past and present "information filtering" projects (including collaborative filtering) at MIT Media Lab
  * Eigentaste: A Constant Time Collaborative Filtering Algorithm. Ken Goldberg, Theresa Roeder, Dhruv Gupta, and Chris Perkins. Information Retrieval, 4(2), 133-151. July 2001.
  * Methods and Metrics for Cold-Start Recommendations

### [edit] Software libraries

Below are links to software libraries that allow developers to add
collaborative filtering to applications or web sites:

  * Taste \- open-source, Java
  * Cofi \- open-source, Java
  * CoFE \- open-source, Java
  * ColFi \- open-source, Java
  * RACOFI \- open-source, Java
  * SUGGEST \- Free, written in C. (A library, not open source.)
  * Rating-Based Item-to-Item \- public domain, PHP
  * Vogoo PHP Lib \- open-source, PHP
  * C/Matlab Toolkit for Collaborative Filtering \- open-source, Matlab, C
  * Fast Maximum Margin Matrix Factorization \- Matlab/Octave

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collaborative_filtering"

Categories: Collective intelligence | Social information processing |
Collaboration | Collaborative software

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2008 |
All pages needing cleanup | Articles with disputed statements from November
2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 26 March 2009, at 21:36.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



