
# USB flash drive

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"JumpDrive" redirects here. For the fictional propulsion system, see Jump
drive.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A 16 GB USB flash drive.

A USB flash drive consists of a NAND-type flash memory data storage device
integrated with a USB (universal serial bus) interface. USB flash drives are
typically removable and rewritable, much smaller than a floppy disk (1 to 4
inches or 2.5 to 10 cm), and most USB flash drives weigh less than an ounce
(28g).[1] Storage capacities typically range from 64 MB to 128 GB[2] with
steady improvements in size and price per gigabyte. Some allow 1 million write
or erase cycles[3][4] and have 10-year data retention,[5] connected by USB 1.1
or USB 2.0.

USB flash drives offer potential advantages over other portable storage
devices, particularly the floppy disk. They have a more compact shape, operate
faster, hold much more data, have a more durable design, and operate more
reliably due to their lack of moving parts. Additionally, it has become
increasingly common for computers to be sold without floppy disk drives. USB
ports, on the other hand, appear on almost every current[update] mainstream PC
and laptop. These types of drives use the USB mass storage standard, supported
natively by modern operating systems such as Windows, Mac OS X, Linux, and
other Unix-like systems. USB drives with USB 2.0 support can also operate
faster than an optical disc drive, while storing a larger amount of data in a
much smaller space.

Nothing actually moves in a flash drive: the term drive persists because
computers read and write flash-drive data using the same system commands as
for a mechanical disk drive, with the storage appearing to the computer
operating system and user interface as just another drive.[4]

A flash drive consists of a small printed circuit board protected inside a
plastic, metal, or rubberised case, robust enough for carrying with no
additional protectionâin a pocket or on a key chain, for example. The USB
connector is protected by a removable cap or by retracting into the body of
the drive, although it is not liable to be damaged if exposed. Most flash
drives use a standard type-A USB connection allowing plugging into a port on a
personal computer.

## Contents

  * 1 Technology
  * 2 History
    * 2.1 First commercial product
    * 2.2 Second generation
  * 3 Design and implementation
    * 3.1 Essential components
    * 3.2 Additional components
    * 3.3 Size and style of packaging
    * 3.4 File system
  * 4 Uses
    * 4.1 Personal data transport
    * 4.2 Secure storage of data, application and software files
    * 4.3 System administration
    * 4.4 Application carriers
    * 4.5 Computer forensics and law enforcement
    * 4.6 Booting operating systems
    * 4.7 Windows Vista and Windows 7 ReadyBoost
    * 4.8 Audio players
    * 4.9 Music storage and marketing
    * 4.10 In arcades
    * 4.11 Brand and product promotion
    * 4.12 Backup
  * 5 Advantages and disadvantages
    * 5.1 Advantages
    * 5.2 Disadvantages
  * 6 Comparison with other portable storage
    * 6.1 Obsolete devices
    * 6.2 Tape
    * 6.3 Floppy disk
    * 6.4 Optical media
    * 6.5 Flash memory cards
    * 6.6 External hard disk
  * 7 Security
    * 7.1 Encryption
    * 7.2 Security threats
    * 7.3 Security breaches
  * 8 Naming
  * 9 Current and future developments
  * 10 See also
  * 11 References
  * 12 External links

  
## [edit] Technology

Main articles: Flash memory and USB

<IMG>

<IMG>

Toshiba TransMemory Flash Drive with cover on. Comes pre-installed with U3,
allowing users to take their applications, fully installed and operational to
most Windows desktops.

Flash memory combines a number of older technologies, with the low cost, low
power consumption and small size made possible by recent[update] advances in
microprocessor technology. The memory storage is based on earlier EPROM and
EEPROM technologies. These had very limited capacity, were very slow for both
reading and writing, required complex high-voltage drive circuitry, and could
only be re-written after erasing the entire contents of the chip.

Hardware designers later developed EEPROMs with the erasure region broken up
into smaller "fields" that could be erased individually without affecting the
others. Altering the contents of a particular memory location involved first
copying the entire field into an off-chip buffer memory, erasing the field,
and then re-writing the data back into the same field, making the necessary
alteration to the relevant memory location while doing so. This required
considerable computer support, and PC-based EEPROM flash memory systems often
carried their own dedicated microprocessor system. Flash drives are more or
less a miniaturized version of this.

The development of high-speed serial data interfaces such as USB for the first
time made memory systems with serially accessed storage viable, and the
simultaneous development of small, high-speed, low-power microprocessor
systems allowed this to be incorporated into extremely compact systems. Serial
access also greatly reduced the number of electrical connections required for
the memory chips, which has allowed the successful manufacture of multi-
gigabyte capacities. (Every external electrical connection is a potential
source of manufacturing failure, and with traditional manufacturing, a point
is rapidly reached where the successful yield approaches zero).

Computers access modern[update] flash memory systems very much like hard disk
drives, where the controller system has full control over where information is
actually stored. The actual EEPROM writing and erasure processes are, however,
still very similar to the earlier systems described above.

Many low-cost MP3 players simply add extra software to a standard flash memory
control microprocessor so it can also serve as a music playback decoder. Most
of these players can also be used as a conventional flash drive, for storing
data.

## [edit] History

### [edit] First commercial product

<IMG>

<IMG>

Flash drive with retractable USB connector

Trek Technology and IBM began selling the first USB flash drives commercially
in 2000. Singaporean company Trek Technology sold a model dubbed the
"ThumbDrive," and IBM marketed the first such drives in North America, with
its product the "DiskOnKey" (which was manufactured by the Israeli company
M-Systems). IBM's USB flash drive became available on December 15, 2000,[6][7]
and had a storage capacity of 8 MB, more than five times the capacity of the
commonly used floppy disks (floppy disks being about 1 MB at the time).

In 2000 Lexar introduced a Compact Flash (CF) card with a USB connection, and
a companion card read/writer and USB cable that eliminated the need for a USB
hub.

In 2004 Trek Technology brought several lawsuits against other USB flash drive
manufacturers and distributors in an attempt to assert its patent rights to
the USB flash drive. A court in Singapore ordered competitors to cease selling
similar products[8] that would be covered by Trek's patent, but a court in the
United Kingdom revoked[9] one of Trek's patents in that country.

### [edit] Second generation

Modern flash drives have USB 2.0 connectivity. However, they do not currently
use the full 480 Mbit/s (60MB/s) the USB 2.0 Hi-Speed specification supports
due to technical limitations inherent in NAND flash. The fastest drives
currently available use a dual channel controller, although they still fall
considerably short of the transfer rate possible from a current generation
hard disk, or the maximum high speed USB throughput.

Typical overall file transfer speeds vary considerably, and should be checked
before purchase. Speeds may be given in Mbyte per second, Mbit per second, or
optical drive multipliers such as "180X" (180 times 150 KiB per second).
Typical fast drives claim to read at up to 30 megabytes/s (MB/s) and write at
about half that. Older "USB full speed" 12 Mbit/s devices are limited to a
maximum of about 1 MB/s.

## [edit] Design and implementation

One end of the device is fitted with a single male type-A USB connector.
Inside the plastic casing is a small printed circuit board. Mounted on this
board is some simple power circuitry and a small number of surface-mounted
integrated circuits (ICs). Typically, one of these ICs provides an interface
to the USB port, another drives the onboard memory, and the other is the flash
memory.

Drives typically use the USB mass storage device class to communicate with the
host.

<IMG>  
Internals of a typical USB flash drive  
1 USB connector  
2 USB mass storage controller device  
3 Test points  
4 Flash memory chip  
5 Crystal oscillator  
6 LED  
7 Write-protect switch (Optional)  
8 Space for second flash memory chip  
### [edit] Essential components

There are typically four parts to a flash drive:

  * Male type-A USB connector â provides an interface to the host computer.
  * USB mass storage controller â implements the USB host controller. The controller contains a small microcontroller with a small amount of on-chip ROM and RAM.
  * NAND flash memory chip â stores data. NAND flash is typically also used in digital cameras.
  * Crystal oscillator â produces the device's main 12 MHz clock signal and controls the device's data output through a phase-locked loop.

### [edit] Additional components

The typical device may also include:

  * Jumpers and test pins â for testing during the flash drive's manufacturing or loading code into the microprocessor.
  * LEDs â indicate data transfers or data reads and writes.
  * Write-protect switches â indicate whether the device should be in "write-protection" mode.
  * Unpopulated space â provides space to include a second memory chip. Having this second space allows the manufacturer to develop only one printed circuit board that can be used for more than one storage size device, to meet the needs of the market.
  * USB connector cover or cap â reduces the risk of damage and prevents the ingress of fluff or other contaminants, and improves overall device appearance. Some flash drives do not feature a cap, but instead have retractable USB connectors. Other flash drives have a "swivel" cap that is permanently connected to the drive itself and eliminates the chance of losing the cap.
  * Transport aid â the cap or the main body often contains a hole suitable for connection to a key chain or lanyard.
  * Some drives offer expandable storage via an internal memory card slot, much like a memory card reader.[10][11]

### [edit] Size and style of packaging

<IMG>

<IMG>

Flash drives come in various, sometimes bulky or novelty, shapes and sizes, in
this case ikura sushi

Some manufacturers differentiate their products by using elaborate housings,
which are often bulky and make the drive difficult to connect to the USB port.
Because the USB port connectors on a computer housing are often closely
spaced, plugging a flash drive into a USB port may block an adjacent port.
Such devices may only carry the USB logo if sold with a separate extension
cable.

USB flash drives have been integrated into other commonly-carried items such
as watches, pens, and even the Swiss Army Knife; others have been fitted with
novelty cases such as toy cars or LEGO bricks. The small size, robustness and
cheapness of USB flash drives make them an increasingly popular peripheral for
case modding.

Heavy or bulky flash drive packaging can make for unreliable operation when
plugged directly into a USB port; this can be relieved by a USB extension
cable. Such cables are USB-compatible, but do not conform to the USB standard.
[12] [13]

### [edit] File system

Main article: List of file systems#Flash memory / solid state media file
systems

Most flash drives ship preformatted with the FAT or FAT 32 file system. The
ubiquity of this file system allows the drive to be accessed on virtually any
host device with USB support. Also, standard FAT maintenance utilities (e.g.
ScanDisk) can be used to repair or retrieve corrupted data. However, because a
flash drive appears as a USB-connected hard drive to the host system, the
drive can be reformatted to any file system supported by the host operating
system.

Flash drives can be defragmented, but this brings little advantage as there is
no mechanical head slowed down by having to move from fragment to fragment
(flash drives often have very large internal sector size, especially when
erasing so defragmenting means accessing fewer sectors to erase a file).
Defragmenting shortens the life of the drive by making many unnecessary
writes.[4]

Some file systems are designed to distribute usage over an entire memory
device without concentrating usage on any part (e.g., for a directory); this
prolongs life of simple flash memory devices. Some USB flash drives, however,
have this functionality built into the controller to prolong device life,
while others do not, therefore the end user should check the specifications of
his device prior to changing the file system for this reason.[5]

  
Sectors are 512 bytes long, for compatibility with hard drives, and first
sector can contain a Master Boot Record and a partition table. Therefore USB
flash units can be partitioned as hard drives.

## [edit] Uses

<IMG>

<IMG>

USB flash drive with lanyard

### [edit] Personal data transport

The most common use of flash drives is to transport and store personal files
such as documents, pictures and videos. Individuals also store medical alert
information on MedicTag flash drives for use in emergencies and for disaster
preparation.

### [edit] Secure storage of data, application and software files

With wide deployment(s) of flash drives being used in various environments
(secured or otherwise), the issue of data and information security remains of
the utmost importance. The use of biometrics and encryption is becoming the
norm with the need for increased security for data; OTFE systems such as
FreeOTFE and TrueCrypt are particularly useful in this regard, as they can
transparently encrypt large amounts of data. In some cases a Secure USB Drive
may use a hardware-based encryption mechanism that uses a hardware module
instead of software for strongly encrypting data.

### [edit] System administration

Flash drives are particularly popular among system and network administrators,
who load them with configuration information and software used for system
maintenance, troubleshooting, and recovery. They are also used as a means to
transfer recovery and antivirus software to infected PCs, allowing a portion
of the host machine's data to be archived. As the drives have increased in
storage space, they have also replaced the need to carry a number of CD ROMs
and installers which were needed when reinstalling or updating a system.

### [edit] Application carriers

Flash drives are used to carry applications that run on the host computer
without requiring installation. While any standalone application can in
principle be used this way, many programs store data, configuration
information, etc. on the hard drive and registry of the host computer

The U3 company works with drive makers (parent company SanDisk as well as
others) to deliver custom versions of applications designed for Microsoft
Windows from a special flash drive; U3-compatible devices are designed to
autoload a menu when plugged into a computer running Windows. Applications
must be modified for the U3 platform not to leave any data on the host
machine. U3 also provides a software framework for ISVs interested in their
platform.

Ceedo is an alternative product with the key difference that it does not
require Windows applications to be modified in order for them to be carried
and run on the drive.

Similarly, other application virtualization solutions, such as VMware ThinApp
can be used to run software from a flash drive without installation.

A range of portable applications which are all free of charge and able to run
off a computer running Windows without storing anything on the host computer's
drives or registry is available from portableapps.com; unlike U3 programs
which run from a special U3-compatible USB stick, the PortableApps menu will
run from a standard device, and can also use the Windows AutoRun feature.[14]

### [edit] Computer forensics and law enforcement

A recent development for the use of a USB Flash Drive as an application
carrier is to carry the Computer Online Forensic Evidence Extractor (COFEE)
application developed by Microsoft. COFEE is a set of applications designed to
search for and extract digital evidence on computers confiscated from
suspects[15]. Forensic software should not alter the information stored on the
computer being examined in any way; other forensic suites run from CD-ROM or
DVD-ROM, but cannot store data on the media they are run from (although they
can write to other attached devices such as external drives or memory sticks).

### [edit] Booting operating systems

Most current PC firmware permits booting from a USB drive, allowing the launch
of an operating system from a bootable flash drive. Such a configuration is
known as a Live USB.

While a Live USB could be used for general-purpose applications, size and
memory wear make them poor choices compared to alternatives. They are more
suited to special-purpose or temporary tasks, such as:

  * Loading a minimal, hardened kernel for embedded applications (e.g. network router, firewall).
  * Bootstrapping an operating system install or disk cloning operation, often across a network.
  * Maintenance tasks, such as virus scanning or low-level data repair, without the primary host operating system loaded.

### [edit] Windows Vista and Windows 7 ReadyBoost

In Windows Vista and the upcoming Windows 7, the ReadyBoost feature allows use
of some flash drives to augment operating system memory.[16]

### [edit] Audio players

Many companies make small solid-state digital audio players, essentially
producing flash drives with sound output and a simple user interface. Examples
include the Creative MuVo and the iPod shuffle. Some of these players are true
USB flash drives as well as music players; others do not support general-
purpose data storage.

Many of the smallest players are powered by a permanently fitted rechargeable
battery, charged from the USB interface.

### [edit] Music storage and marketing

Digital audio files can be transported from one computer to another like any
other file, and played on a compatible media player (with caveats for DRM-
locked files). In addition, many home Hi-Fi and car stereo head units are now
equipped with a USB port. This allows a USB flash drive containing media files
in a variety of formats to be played directly on devices which support the
format.

Artists have sold or given away USB flash drives, with the first instance
believed to be in 2004 when the German band WIZO released the "Stick EP", only
as a USB drive. In addition to five high-bitrate MP3s, it also included a
video, pictures, lyrics, and guitar tablature. Subsequently artists including
Kanye West[17] , Nine Inch Nails and Ayumi Hamasaki [18] have released music
and promotional material on USB flash drives.

### [edit] In arcades

In the arcade game In the Groove and more commonly In The Groove 2, flash
drives are used to transfer high scores, screenshots, dance edits, and combos
throughout sessions. As of software revision 21 (R21), players can also store
custom songs and play them on any machine on which this feature is enabled.
While use of flash drives is common, the drive must be Linux compatible,
causing problems for some players.

In the arcade games Pump it Up NX2 and Pump it Up NX Absolute, a special
produced flash drive is used as a "save file" for unlocked songs, as well as
progressing in the WorldMax and Brain Shower sections of the game.

In the arcade game Dance Dance Revolution X, an exclusive USB flash drive was
made by Konami for the purpose of the link feature from its Sony PlayStation 2
counterpart.

### [edit] Brand and product promotion

The availability of inexpensive flash drives has enabled them to be used for
promotional and marketing purposes, particularly within technical and
computer-industry circles (e.g. technology trade shows). They may be given
away for free, sold at less than wholesale price, or included as a bonus with
another purchased product.

Usually, such drives will be custom-stamped with a company's logo, as a form
of advertising to increase mind share and brand awareness. The drive may be
blank drive, or preloaded with graphics, documentation, web links, Flash
animation or other multimedia, and free or demonstration software. Some
preloaded drives are read-only; others are configured with a read-only and a
writeable partition. Dual-partition drives are more expensive.

Flash drives can be set up to autorun stored presentations, websites and
articles immediately on insertion of the drive by saving a file called
autorun.inf with an appropriate shell script in the root directory of the
drive. [19] Autoloading this way does not work on all computers; the U3 drives
described above load more reliably.

### [edit] Backup

Some value-added resellers are now using a flash drive as part of small-
business turnkey solutions (e.g. point-of-sale systems). The drive is used as
a backup medium: at the close of business each night, the drive is inserted,
and a database backup is saved to the drive. Alternatively, the drive can be
left inserted through the business day, and data regularly updated. In either
case, the drive is removed at night and taken offsite.

  * This is simple for the end-user, and more likely to be done;
  * The drive is small and convenient, and more likely to be carried off-site for safety;
  * The drives are less fragile mechanically and magnetically than tapes;
  * The capacity is often large enough for several backup images of critical data;
  * And flash drives are cheaper than many other backup systems.

It is also easy to lose these small devices, and easy for people without a
right to data to take illicit backups.

## [edit] Advantages and disadvantages

### [edit] Advantages

Flash drives are impervious to scratches and dust, and mechanically very
robust making them suitable for transporting data from place to place and
keeping it readily at hand. Most personal computers support USB as of
2009[update].

Flash drives also store data densely compared to many removable media. In
mid-2008, 64 GB drives became available, with the ability to hold many times
more data than a DVD.

Compared to hard drives, flash drives use little power, have no fragile moving
parts, and for low capacities are small and light.

Flash drives implement the USB mass storage device class so that most modern
operating systems can read and write to them without installing device
drivers. The flash drives present a simple block-structured logical unit to
the host operating system, hiding the individual complex implementation
details of the various underlying flash memory devices. The operating system
can use any file system or block addressing scheme. Some computers can boot up
from flash drives.

Some flash drives retain their memory even after being submerged in water
[20], even through a machine wash, although this is not a design feature and
not to be relied upon. Leaving the flash drive out to dry completely before
allowing current to run through it has been known to result in a working drive
with no future problems. Channel Five's Gadget Show cooked a flash drive with
propane, froze it with dry ice, submerged it in various acidic liquids, ran
over it with a jeep and fired it against a wall with a mortar. A company
specializing in recovering lost data from computer drives managed to recover
all the data on the drive. [21] All data on the other removable storage
devices tested, using optical or magnetic technologies, were destroyed.

### [edit] Disadvantages

Like all flash memory devices, flash drives can sustain only a limited number
of write and erase cycles before failure[22][23]. This should be a
consideration when using a flash drive to run application software or an
operating system. To address this, as well as space limitations, some
developers have produced special versions of operating systems (such as Linux
in Live USB) [24] or commonplace applications (such as Mozilla Firefox)
designed to run from flash drives. These are typically optimized for size and
configured to place temporary or intermediate files in the computer's main RAM
rather than store them temporarily on the flash drive.

Most USB flash drives do not include a write-protect mechanism, although some
have a switch on the housing of the drive itself to keep the host computer
from writing or modifying data on the drive. Write-protection makes a device
suitable for repairing virus-contaminated host computers without risk of
infecting the USB flash drive itself.

A drawback to the small size is that they are easily misplaced, left behind,
or otherwise lost. This is a particular problem if the data they contain are
sensitive (see data security). As a consequence, some manufacturers have added
encryption hardware to their drives -- although software encryption systems
achieve the same thing, and are universally available for all USB flash
drives. Others just have the possibility of being attached to keychains,
necklaces and lanyards.

Compared to other portable storage device, for example external hard drives,
USB flash drives have a high price per unit of storage and are only available
in comparatively small capacities; but hard drives have a higher minimum
price, so in the smaller capacities (16 GB and less), USB flash drives are
much less expensive than the smallest available hard drives.[25]

## [edit] Comparison with other portable storage

### [edit] Obsolete devices

Audio tape cassettes are no longer used for data storage. High-capacity floppy
discs (e.g. Imation SuperDisk), and other forms of drives with removable
magnetic media such as the Iomega Zip and Jaz drives are now largely obsolete
and rarely used. There are products in todays market which will emulate these
legacy drives - for both Tape & Disk (SCSI1/SCSI2, SASI, Magneto optic, Ricoh
ZIP, Jaz, IBM3590/ Fujitsu 3490E and Bernouilli for example)into a state of
the art Compact Flash storage devices - CF2SCSI.

### [edit] Tape

The applications of current data tape cartridges hardly overlap those of flash
drives: the drives and media are very expensive, have very high capacity,
slower transfer speed than most other storage media, and store data
sequentially, leading to very long access times. These devices are used for
routine backup of large systems.

### [edit] Floppy disk

<IMG>

<IMG>

The size of a Flash Drive compared to the size of a 3.5 inch Floppy Disk.
Common flash drives have much larger (factor of 1000's) storage capacity than
a floppy disk.

Floppy disks are rarely fitted to modern computers and are obsolete for normal
purposes, although internal and external drives can be fitted if required.
Floppy disks may be the method of choice for transferring data to and from
very old computers without USB or boot from floppy disks, and so they are
sometimes used to change the firmware on, for example, BIOS chips.

### [edit] Optical media

The various writable and rewritable forms of CD and DVD are portable storage
media supported by the vast majority of computers as of 2008. CD-R, DVD-R, and
DVD+R can be written to only once., RW varieties up to about 1,000 erase/write
cycles, while modern NAND-based flash drives often last for 500,000 or more
erase/write cycles.[citation needed] DVD-RAM discs are the most suitable
optical discs for data storage involving much rewriting.

Optical storage devices are among the cheapest methods of mass data storage
after the hard drive. They are slower than their flash-based counterparts.
Standard 12 cm optical discs are larger than flash drives and more subject to
damage. Smaller optical media do exist, such as business card CD-Rs which have
the same dimensions as a credit card, and the slightly less convenient but
higher capacity 8 cm recordable CD/DVDs. The small discs are more expensive
than the standard size, and do not work in all drives.

Universal Disk Format (UDF) version 1.50 and above has facilities to support
rewritable discs like sparing tables and virtual allocation tables, spreading
usage over the entire surface of a disc and maximising life, but many older
operating systems do not support this format. Packet-writing utilities such as
DirectCD and InCD are available but produce discs that are not universally
readable (although based on the UDF standard). The Mount Rainier standard
addresses this shortcoming in CD-RW media by running the older file systems on
top of it and performing defect management for those standards, but it
requires support from both the CD/DVD burner and the operating system. Many
drives made today do not support Mount Rainier, and many older operating
systems such as Windows XP and below, and Linux kernels older than 2.6.2, do
not support it (later versions do). Essentially CDs/DVDs are a good way to
record a great deal of information cheaply and have the advantage of being
readable by most standalone players, but they are poor at making ongoing small
changes to a large collection of information. Flash drives' ability to do this
is their major advantage over optical media.

### [edit] Flash memory cards

Flash memory cards, e.g. Secure Digital cards, are available in various
formats and capacities, and are used by many consumer devices. However, while
virtually all PCs have USB ports, allowing the use of USB flash drives, memory
card readers are not commonly supplied as standard equipment (particularly
with desktop computers). Although inexpensive card readers are available that
read many common formats, this results in two pieces of portable equipment
(card plus reader) rather than one.

Some manufacturers, aiming at a "best of both worlds" solution, have produced
card readers that approach the size and form of UFDs (e.g. Kingston
MobileLite[26], SanDisk MobileMate[27]). These readers are limited to a
specific subset of memory card formats (such as SD, microSD, or Memory Stick),
and often completely enclose the card, offering durability and portability
approaching, if not quite equal to, that of a UFD. Although the combined cost
of a mini-reader and a memory card is usually slightly higher than a UFD of
comparable capacity, the reader + card solution offers additional flexibility
of use, and virtually "unlimited" capacity.

An additional advantage of memory cards is that many consumer devices (e.g.
digital cameras, portable music players) cannot make use of USB flash drives
(even if the device has a USB port) whereas the memory cards used by the
devices can be read by PCs with a card reader.

### [edit] External hard disk

Main article: External hard disk drive

Particularly with the advent of USB, external hard disks have become widely
available and inexpensive. As drive capacity increases, external hard disk
drives cost less per megabyte than flash drives, and are available in much
larger capacities. Some hard drives support alternative and faster interfaces
than USB 2.0 (e.g. IEEE 1394 and eSATA). For writes and consecutive sector
reads (for example, from an unfragmented file), most hard drives can provide a
much higher sustained data rate than current NAND flash memory.

Unlike solid-state memory, hard drives are susceptible to damage by shock,
e.g., a short fall, have limitations on use at high altitude, and, like all
magnetic media, are vulnerable when exposed to strong magnetic fields,
although shielded by their casing. Hard drives are usually larger and heavier
than flash drives in terms of overall mass, although hard disks often weigh
less per unit of storage. Hard disks also suffer from file fragmentation which
can reduce access speed.

## [edit] Security

As highly portable media, USB flash drives are easily lost or stolen. Several
measures can be used to prevent the data on lost USB flash drives from being
accessed by unauthorized users. Some of these measures, such as password-
protected encryption, are used on other storage mediums such as floppy disks,
hard disk drives, and CD-ROMs in an attempt to keep data from falling into the
wrong hands. However, as history has shown, any method of preventing
unauthorized access is only secure until it has been compromised.

In addition to securing on-board data, USB flash drives are increasingly being
called upon to protect the environments in which they are used. In particular,
USB flash drives have been used to transfer malware and autorun worms, usually
unbeknownst to their owners, which can then infect and wreck havoc upon an
otherwise secure network.

### [edit] Encryption

All USB flash drives can have their contents encrypted using third party disk
encryption software such as FreeOTFE and TrueCrypt, which can be used without
installation. The executable files can be stored on the USB drive, together
with the encrypted file image. The encrypted partition can then be accessed on
any computer running the correct operating system, although it may require the
user to have administrative rights on the host computer to access data.

Other flash drives allow the user to configure secure and public partitions of
different sizes, and offer hardware encryption.

Newer flash drives support biometric fingerprinting to confirm the user's
identity. As of mid-2005[update], this was a costly alternative to standard
password protection offered on many new USB flash storage devices. Most
fingerprint scanning drives rely upon the host operating system to validate
the fingerprint via a software driver, often restricting the drive to
Microsoft Windows computers. However, there are USB drives with fingerprint
scanners which use controllers that allow access to protected data without any
authentication.[28]

Some manufacturers deploy physical authentication tokens in the form of a
flash drive. These are used to control access to a sensitive system by
containing encryption keys or, more commonly, communicating with security
software on the target machine. The system is designed so the target machine
will not operate except when the flash drive device is plugged into it. Some
of these "PC lock" devices also function as normal flash drives when plugged
into other machines.

### [edit] Security threats

Flash drives present a significant security challenge for large organizations.
Their small size and ease of use allows unsupervised visitors or unscrupulous
employees to smuggle confidential data out with little chance of detection.
Equally, corporate and public computers alike are vulnerable to attackers
connecting a flash drive to a free USB port and using malicious software such
as keyboard loggers or packet sniffers. To prevent this, some Antivirus
software companies have designed specific applications to protect computers
from the spread of malware via USB flash drives.

Also it is possible to run a solution that has been specifically designed to
run from a USB flash drive. This kind of solution prioritises the protection
of the USB flash drives and protects any sensitive data contained on USB flash
drives from infected malware residing on any computer that the USB flash drive
is attached to.

Alternatively some organizations simply forbid the use of flash drives
altogether, and some computers are configured to disable the mounting of USB
mass storage devices by ordinary users; others use third-party software to
control USB usage. In a lower-tech security solution, some organizations
disconnect USB ports inside the computer or fill the USB sockets with epoxy.

### [edit] Security breaches

Examples of security breaches as a result of using USB drives include:

  * In the UK: 
    * HM Revenue & Customs lost personal details of 6500 private pension holders.
    * Nine NHS trusts lost patient records kept on disk; details of 1,500 students were lost in the post.
    * Details of three million British learner drivers were lost.

  * In the United States: 
    * A USB drive was stolen with names, grades, and social security numbers of 6,500 former students.
    * USB flash drives with US Army classified military information were up for sale at a bazaar outside Bagram, Afghanistan.[29]

## [edit] Naming

By August 2008, "USB flash drive" or simply "UFD" had emerged as a de facto
standard term for these devices,[citation needed] and most major
manufacturers[who?] use similar wording on their packaging, although
potentially confusing alternatives (such as memory stick) or USB memory key
still occur. The myriad different brand names and terminology used, in the
past and currently[update], make UFDs more difficult for manufacturers to
market and for consumers to research. Some commonly-used names actually
represent trademarks of particular companies, such as Cruzer, TravelDrive,
ThumbDrive, and Disgo.

## [edit] Current and future developments

Semiconductor corporations have worked to reduce the cost of the components in
a flash drive by integrating various flash drive functions in a single chip,
thereby reducing the part-count and overall package-cost.

Flash drive capacities on the market increase continually. As of 2008[update]
few manufacturers continue to produce models of 256 MB and smaller; and many
have started to phase out 512 MB capacity flash memory. High-speed has become
a standard for modern flash drives and capacities of up to 128 GB have come on
the market, as of 2009.[30]

Lexar is attempting to introduce a USB FlashCard [31] [32], which would be a
compact USB flash drive intended to replace various kinds of flash memory
cards. Pretec introduced a similar card, which also plugs into every USB port,
but is just one quarter the thickness of the Lexar model [33] SanDisk has a
product called SD Plus, which is a SecureDigital card with a USB
connector.[34]

SanDisk has also introduced a new technology to allow controlled storage and
usage of copyrighted materials on flash drives, primarily for use by students.
This technology is termed FlashCP.

## [edit] See also

  * USB Flash Drive Alliance

## [edit] References

  1. ^ http://peripherals.about.com/od/removablestorage/f/USBFAQ.htm
  2. ^ [1]
  3. ^ "Imation Swivel Pro Flash Drive", About.com, 2008, webpage: AboutCom-Swivel-Pro-Flash.
  4. ^ a b USB flash drives allow reading, writing, and erasing of data, with some allowing 1 million write/erase cycles in each cell of memory: if 100 uses per day, 1 million cycles could span 10,000 days or over 27 years. Some devices level the usage by auto-shifting activity to underused sections of memory.
  5. ^ "USB flash drive weighs 32 g", Trade Media Ltd, June 2006, webpage: GSources-flash-6102.
  6. ^ "8MB USB Memory Key - Overview". www.ibm.com. http://www-307.ibm.com/pc/support/site.wss/document.do?sitestyle=lenovo&lndocid=MIGR-4R3GWN.
  7. ^ "8 MB USB Memory Key - User Guide - First Published December 2000". www.ibm.com. ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/pc/pccbbs/options/22p5250.pdf.
  8. ^ "Singapore firm wins patent on thumb drive". The Straits Times. http://www.bangkokpost.com/breaking_news/breakingnews.php?id=70859. Retrieved on 2006-08-01.
  9. ^ "Patent decision". http://www.ipo.gov.uk/patent/p-decisionmaking/p-challenge/p-challenge-decision-results/p-challenge-decision-results-bl?BL_Number=O/318/06.
  10. ^ http://www.ces-show.com/2006/review/pny/pny_usb_flash_drive.html
  11. ^ http://www.techchee.com/2008/05/20/bluetrek-bizz-an-expandable-usb-drive-and-a-bluetooth-headset-in-one/
  12. ^ USB 1.0 Spec Position on Extension Cables and Pass-Through MonitorsPDF (13.7 KiB)
  13. ^ USB 2.0 Specification Engineering Change Notice (ECN) #1: Mini-B connectorPDF (958 KiB)
  14. ^ http://portableapps.com/node/9241
  15. ^ "Microsoft device helps police pluck evidence from cyberscene of crime". The Seattle Times. http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/microsoft/2004379751_msftlaw29.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-29.
  16. ^ [2]
  17. ^ CHR â Available for Airplay. FMQB. Accessed September 23, 2007.
  18. ^ "PART ONE/// WITH HEARTS AS ONE USB Wristband". Hillsong.com. http://www.hillsong.com/music/product.php?xProd=4559. Retrieved on 2008-04-12.
  19. ^ USB flash drive auto run setup, article from Flashbay.com
  20. ^ "Kingmax Super Stick". http://www.kingmaxdigi.com/news/news_product/news_p20051114.htm. Retrieved on 2006-08-01.
  21. ^ testing removable media on the Gadget Show.
  22. ^ http://www.bress.net/blog/archives/114-How-Long-Does-a-Flash-Drive-Last.html
  23. ^ http://www.corsairmemory.com/_faq/FAQ_flash_drive_wear_leveling.pdf
  24. ^ http://linux-usb.sourceforge.net/USB-guide/x498.html
  25. ^ Flash Memory vs. HDD - Who Will Win? - article on STORAGE search .com
  26. ^ "MobileLite 9-in-1 Reader". Kingston Technology. http://www.kingston.com/flash/mobilelite_reader.asp. Retrieved on 2009-04-08.
  27. ^ "MobileMate Memory Stick Plus 4-in-1 Reader". Sandisk Corporation. http://www.sandisk.com/Products/Item(1219)-SDDR-108-A11M-SanDisk_MobileMate_Memory_Stick_Plus_4in1_Reader.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-04-08.
  28. ^ Access to protected data areas without the right fingerprint
  29. ^ âAfghan market sells US military flash drivesâ, Paul Watson, Los Angeles Times, 18 April 2006
  30. ^ [3]
  31. ^ Lexar Unveils New USB Card Form Factor and Introduces New USB FlashCard
  32. ^ USB FlashCard (UFC) Highlights
  33. ^ Pretec i-Disk Diamond (the smallest USB flash drive)
  34. ^ "SanDisk Ultra II SD Plus Cards". SanDisk. http://www.dpreview.com/news/0501/05010606sandisksdflip.asp. Retrieved on 2008-03-02.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: USB flash drive  
  * USB flash drive additional information, uses, capacities, and general details

v â¢ d â¢ e

Memory cards  
CompactFlash (CF) â¢ JEIDA â¢ Memory Stick (MS/MS-PRO) â¢ miCard â¢
Microdrive (MD) â¢ PC Card â¢ SmartMedia (SM) â¢ SxS â¢ Universal Flash
Storage (UFS) â¢ USB â¢ xD-Picture  
MMC/SD

MultiMediaCard (MMC) â¢ Secure Digital (SD) â¢ miniSD â¢ microSD  
Memory card reader  
Comparison of memory cards â¢ SD Card/MultiMediaCard Family Comparison  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Audio recording formats  
Analog

Phonautogram (1857) Â· Phonograph cylinder (1877) Â· Gramophone record (1895)
Â· Wire recording (1898) Â· Reel-to-reel tape (1940s) Â· SoundScriber (1945)
Â· Gray Audograph (1945) Â· Dictabelt (1947) Â· LP record (1948) Â· 45 rpm
record (1949) Â· RCA tape cartridge (1958) Â· Fidelipac (1959) Â· Stereo-Pak
(1962) Â· Compact Cassette (1963) Â· Stereo 8 (1964) Â· PlayTape (1966) Â·
Mini Cassette (1967) Â· Microcassette (1969) Â· Steno-Cassette (1971) Â·
Elcaset (1976) Â· Cassette single (1982) Â· Picocassette (1985)  
Digital

Soundstream (1976) Â· 3M (1979) Â· X80/ProDigi (1980) Â· DASH (1982) Â·
Compact Disc (1982) Â· Digital Audio Tape (1987) Â· ADAT (1991) Â· MiniDisc
(1991) Â· NT (1992) Â· Digital Compact Cassette (1992) Â· Extended Resolution
Compact Disc (1995) Â· High Definition Compatible Digital (1995) Â· 5.1 Music
Disc (1997) Â· Super Audio CD (1999) Â· DVD-Audio (2000) Â· USB flash drive
(as audio format, 2004) Â· Hi-MD (2004) Â· K2 High Definition (2007) Â· Blu-
spec CD (2008) Â· slotMusic (2008)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USB_flash_drive"

Categories: Computer storage devices | Solid-state computer storage media |
USB | 2000 introductions

Hidden categories: Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008
| All articles containing potentially dated statements | Articles containing
potentially dated statements from 2009 | All articles with unsourced
statements | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 |
Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2005 | Articles with
unsourced statements since August 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles
with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * VÃ¨neto
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 21:22 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



