
# Bioinformatics

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Map of the human X chromosome (from the NCBI website). Assembly of the human
genome is one of the greatest achievements of bioinformatics.

Bioinformatics is the application of information technology to the field of
molecular biology. The term bioinformatics was coined by Paulien Hogeweg in
1978 for the study of informatic processes in biotic systems. Bioinformatics
nowadays entails the creation and advancement of databases, algorithms,
computational and statistical techniques, and theory to solve formal and
practical problems arising from the management and analysis of biological
data. Over the past few decades rapid developments in genomic and other
molecular research technologies and developments in information technologies
have combined to produce a tremendous amount of information related to
molecular biology. It is the name given to these mathematical and computing
approaches used to glean understanding of biological processes. Common
activities in bioinformatics include mapping and analyzing DNA and protein
sequences, aligning different DNA and protein sequences to compare them and
creating and viewing 3-D models of protein structures. Bioinformatics is the
branch of life science that deals with the study of application of information
technology to the field of molecular biology.

The primary goal of bioinformatics is to increase our understanding of
biological processes. What sets it apart from other approaches, however, is
its focus on developing and applying computationally intensive techniques
(e.g., data mining, and machine learning algorithms) to achieve this goal.
Major research efforts in the field include sequence alignment, gene finding,
genome assembly, protein structure alignment, protein structure prediction,
prediction of gene expression and protein-protein interactions, genome-wide
association studies and the modeling of evolution.

## Contents

  * 1 Introduction
  * 2 Major research areas
    * 2.1 Sequence analysis
    * 2.2 Genome annotation
    * 2.3 Computational evolutionary biology
    * 2.4 Measuring biodiversity
    * 2.5 Analysis of gene expression
    * 2.6 Analysis of regulation
    * 2.7 Analysis of protein expression
    * 2.8 Analysis of mutations in cancer
    * 2.9 Prediction of protein structure
    * 2.10 Comparative genomics
    * 2.11 Modeling biological systems
    * 2.12 High-throughput image analysis
    * 2.13 Protein-protein docking
    * 2.14 Software and tools
    * 2.15 Web services in bioinformatics
  * 3 See also
    * 3.1 Related topics
    * 3.2 Related fields
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links
  * 6 See also

  
## [edit] Introduction

Bioinformatics was applied in the creation and maintenance of a database to
store biological information at the beginning of the "genomic revolution",
such as nucleotide and amino acid sequences. Development of this type of
database involved not only design issues but the development of complex
interfaces whereby researchers could both access existing data as well as
submit new or revised data.

In order to study how normal cellular activities are altered in different
disease states, the biological data must be combined to form a comprehensive
picture of these activities. Therefore, the field of bioinformatics has
evolved such that the most pressing task now involves the analysis and
interpretation of various types of data, including nucleotide and amino acid
sequences, protein domains, and protein structures. The actual process of
analyzing and interpreting data is referred to as computational biology.
Important sub-disciplines within bioinformatics and computational biology
include: a) the development and implementation of tools that enable efficient
access to, and use and management of, various types of information. b) the
development of new algorithms (mathematical formulas) and statistics with
which to assess relationships among members of large data sets, such as
methods to locate a gene within a sequence, predict protein structure and/or
function, and cluster protein sequences into families of related sequences.

## [edit] Major research areas

### [edit] Sequence analysis

Main articles: Sequence alignment and Sequence database

Since the Phage Î¦-X174 was sequenced in 1977, the DNA sequences of hundreds
of organisms have been decoded and stored in databases. The information is
analyzed to determine genes that encode polypeptides, as well as regulatory
sequences. A comparison of genes within a species or between different species
can show similarities between protein functions, or relations between species
(the use of molecular systematics to construct phylogenetic trees). With the
growing amount of data, it long ago became impractical to analyze DNA
sequences manually. Today, computer programs are used to search the genome of
thousands of organisms, containing billions of nucleotides. These programs
would compensate for mutations (exchanged, deleted or inserted bases) in the
DNA sequence, in order to identify sequences that are related, but not
identical. A variant of this sequence alignment is used in the sequencing
process itself. The so-called shotgun sequencing technique (which was used,
for example, by The Institute for Genomic Research to sequence the first
bacterial genome, Haemophilus influenzae) does not give a sequential list of
nucleotides, but instead the sequences of thousands of small DNA fragments
(each about 600-800 nucleotides long). The ends of these fragments overlap
and, when aligned in the right way, make up the complete genome. Shotgun
sequencing yields sequence data quickly, but the task of assembling the
fragments can be quite complicated for larger genomes. In the case of the
Human Genome Project, it took several days of CPU time (on one hundred Pentium
III desktop machines clustered specifically for the purpose) to assemble the
fragments. Shotgun sequencing is the method of choice for virtually all
genomes sequenced today, and genome assembly algorithms are a critical area of
bioinformatics research.

Another aspect of bioinformatics in sequence analysis is the automatic search
for genes and regulatory sequences within a genome. Not all of the nucleotides
within a genome are genes. Within the genome of higher organisms, large parts
of the DNA do not serve any obvious purpose. This so-called junk DNA may,
however, contain unrecognized functional elements. Bioinformatics helps to
bridge the gap between genome and proteome projects--for example, in the use
of DNA sequences for protein identification.

See also: sequence analysis, sequence profiling tool, sequence motif.

### [edit] Genome annotation

Main article: Gene finding

In the context of genomics, annotation is the process of marking the genes and
other biological features in a DNA sequence. The first genome annotation
software system was designed in 1995 by Dr. Owen White, who was part of the
team that sequenced and analyzed the first genome of a free-living organism to
be decoded, the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae. Dr. White built a software
system to find the genes (places in the DNA sequence that encode a protein),
the transfer RNA, and other features, and to make initial assignments of
function to those genes. Most current genome annotation systems work
similarly, but the programs available for analysis of genomic DNA are
constantly changing and improving.

### [edit] Computational evolutionary biology

Evolutionary biology is the study of the origin and descent of species, as
well as their change over time. Informatics has assisted evolutionary
biologists in several key ways; it has enabled researchers to:

  * trace the evolution of a large number of organisms by measuring changes in their DNA, rather than through physical taxonomy or physiological observations alone,
  * more recently, compare entire genomes, which permits the study of more complex evolutionary events, such as gene duplication, horizontal gene transfer, and the prediction of factors important in bacterial speciation,
  * build complex computational models of populations to predict the outcome of the system over time
  * track and share information on an increasingly large number of species and organisms

Future work endeavours to reconstruct the now more complex tree of life.

The area of research within computer science that uses genetic algorithms is
sometimes confused with computational evolutionary biology, but the two areas
are unrelated.

### [edit] Measuring biodiversity

Biodiversity of an ecosystem might be defined as the total genomic complement
of a particular environment, from all of the species present, whether it is a
biofilm in an abandoned mine, a drop of sea water, a scoop of soil, or the
entire biosphere of the planet Earth. Databases are used to collect the
species names, descriptions, distributions, genetic information, status and
size of populations, habitat needs, and how each organism interacts with other
species. Specialized software programs are used to find, visualize, and
analyze the information, and most importantly, communicate it to other people.
Computer simulations model such things as population dynamics, or calculate
the cumulative genetic health of a breeding pool (in agriculture) or
endangered population (in conservation). One very exciting potential of this
field is that entire DNA sequences, or genomes of endangered species can be
preserved, allowing the results of Nature's genetic experiment to be
remembered in silico, and possibly reused in the future, even if that species
is eventually lost.[1]

### [edit] Analysis of gene expression

The expression of many genes can be determined by measuring mRNA levels with
multiple techniques including microarrays, expressed cDNA sequence tag (EST)
sequencing, serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) tag sequencing,
massively parallel signature sequencing (MPSS), or various applications of
multiplexed in-situ hybridization. All of these techniques are extremely
noise-prone and/or subject to bias in the biological measurement, and a major
research area in computational biology involves developing statistical tools
to separate signal from noise in high-throughput gene expression studies. Such
studies are often used to determine the genes implicated in a disorder: one
might compare microarray data from cancerous epithelial cells to data from
non-cancerous cells to determine the transcripts that are up-regulated and
down-regulated in a particular population of cancer cells.

### [edit] Analysis of regulation

Regulation is the complex orchestration of events starting with an
extracellular signal such as a hormone and leading to an increase or decrease
in the activity of one or more proteins. Bioinformatics techniques have been
applied to explore various steps in this process. For example, promoter
analysis involves the identification and study of sequence motifs in the DNA
surrounding the coding region of a gene. These motifs influence the extent to
which that region is transcribed into mRNA. Expression data can be used to
infer gene regulation: one might compare microarray data from a wide variety
of states of an organism to form hypotheses about the genes involved in each
state. In a single-cell organism, one might compare stages of the cell cycle,
along with various stress conditions (heat shock, starvation, etc.). One can
then apply clustering algorithms to that expression data to determine which
genes are co-expressed. For example, the upstream regions (promoters) of co-
expressed genes can be searched for over-represented regulatory elements.

### [edit] Analysis of protein expression

Protein microarrays and high throughput (HT) mass spectrometry (MS) can
provide a snapshot of the proteins present in a biological sample.
Bioinformatics is very much involved in making sense of protein microarray and
HT MS data; the former approach faces similar problems as with microarrays
targeted at mRNA, the latter involves the problem of matching large amounts of
mass data against predicted masses from protein sequence databases, and the
complicated statistical analysis of samples where multiple, but incomplete
peptides from each protein are detected.

### [edit] Analysis of mutations in cancer

In cancer, the genomes of affected cells are rearranged in complex or even
unpredictable ways. Massive sequencing efforts are used to identify previously
unknown point mutations in a variety of genes in cancer. Bioinformaticians
continue to produce specialized automated systems to manage the sheer volume
of sequence data produced, and they create new algorithms and software to
compare the sequencing results to the growing collection of human genome
sequences and germline polymorphisms. New physical detection technology are
employed, such as oligonucleotide microarrays to identify chromosomal gains
and losses (called comparative genomic hybridization), and single nucleotide
polymorphism arrays to detect known point mutations. These detection methods
simultaneously measure several hundred thousand sites throughout the genome,
and when used in high-throughput to measure thousands of samples, generate
terabytes of data per experiment. Again the massive amounts and new types of
data generate new opportunities for bioinformaticians. The data is often found
to contain considerable variability, or noise, and thus Hidden Markov model
and change-point analysis methods are being developed to infer real copy
number changes.

Another type of data that requires novel informatics development is the
analysis of lesions found to be recurrent among many tumors .

### [edit] Prediction of protein structure

Main article: Protein structure prediction

Protein structure prediction is another important application of
bioinformatics. The amino acid sequence of a protein, the so-called primary
structure, can be easily determined from the sequence on the gene that codes
for it. In the vast majority of cases, this primary structure uniquely
determines a structure in its native environment. (Of course, there are
exceptions, such as the bovine spongiform encephalopathy \- aka Mad Cow
Disease \- prion.) Knowledge of this structure is vital in understanding the
function of the protein. For lack of better terms, structural information is
usually classified as one of secondary, tertiary and quaternary structure. A
viable general solution to such predictions remains an open problem. As of
now, most efforts have been directed towards heuristics that work most of the
time.

One of the key ideas in bioinformatics is the notion of homology. In the
genomic branch of bioinformatics, homology is used to predict the function of
a gene: if the sequence of gene A, whose function is known, is homologous to
the sequence of gene B, whose function is unknown, one could infer that B may
share A's function. In the structural branch of bioinformatics, homology is
used to determine which parts of a protein are important in structure
formation and interaction with other proteins. In a technique called homology
modeling, this information is used to predict the structure of a protein once
the structure of a homologous protein is known. This currently remains the
only way to predict protein structures reliably.

One example of this is the similar protein homology between hemoglobin in
humans and the hemoglobin in legumes (leghemoglobin). Both serve the same
purpose of transporting oxygen in the organism. Though both of these proteins
have completely different amino acid sequences, their protein structures are
virtually identical, which reflects their near identical purposes.

Other techniques for predicting protein structure include protein threading
and de novo (from scratch) physics-based modeling.

See also: structural motif and structural domain.

### [edit] Comparative genomics

Main article: Comparative genomics

The core of comparative genome analysis is the establishment of the
correspondence between genes (orthology analysis) or other genomic features in
different organisms. It is these intergenomic maps that make it possible to
trace the evolutionary processes responsible for the divergence of two
genomes. A multitude of evolutionary events acting at various organizational
levels shape genome evolution. At the lowest level, point mutations affect
individual nucleotides. At a higher level, large chromosomal segments undergo
duplication, lateral transfer, inversion, transposition, deletion and
insertion. Ultimately, whole genomes are involved in processes of
hybridization, polyploidization and endosymbiosis, often leading to rapid
speciation. The complexity of genome evolution poses many exciting challenges
to developers of mathematical models and algorithms, who have recourse to a
spectra of algorithmic, statistical and mathematical techniques, ranging from
exact, heuristics, fixed parameter and approximation algorithms for problems
based on parsimony models to Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithms for Bayesian
analysis of problems based on probabilistic models.

Many of these studies are based on the homology detection and protein families
computation.

### [edit] Modeling biological systems

Main article: Systems biology

Systems biology involves the use of computer simulations of cellular
subsystems (such as the networks of metabolites and enzymes which comprise
metabolism, signal transduction pathways and gene regulatory networks) to both
analyze and visualize the complex connections of these cellular processes.
Artificial life or virtual evolution attempts to understand evolutionary
processes via the computer simulation of simple (artificial) life forms.

### [edit] High-throughput image analysis

Computational technologies are used to accelerate or fully automate the
processing, quantification and analysis of large amounts of high-information-
content biomedical imagery. Modern image analysis systems augment an
observer's ability to make measurements from a large or complex set of images,
by improving accuracy, objectivity, or speed. A fully developed analysis
system may completely replace the observer. Although these systems are not
unique to biomedical imagery, biomedical imaging is becoming more important
for both diagnostics and research. Some examples are:

  * high-throughput and high-fidelity quantification and sub-cellular localization (high-content screening, cytohistopathology)
  * morphometrics
  * clinical image analysis and visualization
  * determining the real-time air-flow patterns in breathing lungs of living animals
  * quantifying occlusion size in real-time imagery from the development of and recovery during arterial injury
  * making behavioral observations from extended video recordings of laboratory animals
  * infrared measurements for metabolic activity determination
  * inferring clone overlaps in DNA mapping, e.g. the Sulston score

### [edit] Protein-protein docking

Main article: Protein-protein docking

In the last two decades, tens of thousands of protein three-dimensional
structures have been determined by X-ray crystallography and Protein nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (protein NMR). One central question for the
biological scientist is whether it is practical to predict possible protein-
protein interactions only based on these 3D shapes, without doing protein-
protein interaction experiments. A variety of methods have been developed to
tackle the Protein-protein docking problem, though it seems that there is
still much work to be done in this field.

### [edit] Software and tools

Software tools for bioinformatics range from simple command-line tools, to
more complex graphical programs and standalone web-services available from
various bioinformatics companies or public institutions. The computational
biology tool best-known among biologists is probably BLAST, an algorithm for
determining the similarity of arbitrary sequences against other sequences,
possibly from curated databases of protein or DNA sequences. BLAST is one of a
number of generally available programs for doing sequence alignment. The NCBI
provides a popular web-based implementation that searches their databases.

### [edit] Web services in bioinformatics

SOAP and REST-based interfaces have been developed for a wide variety of
bioinformatics applications allowing an application running on one computer in
one part of the world to use algorithms, data and computing resources on
servers in other parts of the world. The main advantages lay in the end user
not having to deal with software and database maintenance overheads[2] Basic
bioinformatics services are classified by the EBI into three categories: SSS
(Sequence Search Services), MSA (Multiple Sequence Alignment) and BSA
(Biological Sequence Analysis). The availability of these service-oriented
bioinformatics resources demonstrate the applicability of web based
bioinformatics solutions, and range from a collection of standalone tools with
a common data format under a single, standalone or web-based interface, to
integrative, distributed and extensible bioinformatics workflow management
systems.

## [edit] See also

### [edit] Related topics

  * Biocybernetics
  * Bioinformatics companies
  * Biologically-inspired computing
  * Biomedical informatics
  * Computational biology
  * Computational biomodeling
  * Computational genomics
  * DNA sequencing theory
  * Dot plot (bioinformatics)
  * Dry lab
  * Margaret Oakley Dayhoff
  * Metabolic network modelling
  * Molecular modelling
  * Morphometrics
  * Natural computation
  * Pharmaceutical company
  * Protein-protein interaction prediction
  * List of numerical analysis software
  * List of scientific journals in bioinformatics

### [edit] Related fields

  * Applied mathematics
  * Artificial intelligence
  * Biology
  * Cheminformatics
  * Clinomics
  * Comparative genomics
  * Computational biology
  * Computational epigenetics
  * Computational science
  * Computer science
  * Cybernetics
  * Ecoinformatics
  * Genomics
  * Informatics
  * Information theory
  * Mathematical biology
  * Neuroinformatics
  * Proteomics
  * Pervasive adaptation
  * Scientific computing
  * Statistics
  * Structural biology
  * Systems biology
  * Theoretical biology
  * Veterinary informatics

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Important projects: Species 2000 project; uBio Project; Partnership for Biodiversity Informatics
  2. ^ European Bioinformatics Institute

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (February 2008)  
  * Achuthsankar S Nair Computational Biology & Bioinformatics - A gentle Overview, Communications of Computer Society of India, January 2007
  * Aluru, Srinivas, ed. Handbook of Computational Molecular Biology. Chapman & Hall/Crc, 2006. ISBN 1584884061 (Chapman & Hall/Crc Computer and Information Science Series)
  * Baldi, P and Brunak, S, Bioinformatics: The Machine Learning Approach, 2nd edition. MIT Press, 2001. ISBN 0-262-02506-X
  * Barnes, M.R. and Gray, I.C., eds., Bioinformatics for Geneticists, first edition. Wiley, 2003. ISBN 0-470-84394-2
  * Baxevanis, A.D. and Ouellette, B.F.F., eds., Bioinformatics: A Practical Guide to the Analysis of Genes and Proteins, third edition. Wiley, 2005. ISBN 0-471-47878-4
  * Baxevanis, A.D., Petsko, G.A., Stein, L.D., and Stormo, G.D., eds., Current Protocols in Bioinformatics. Wiley, 2007. ISBN 0-471-25093-7
  * Claverie, J.M. and C. Notredame, Bioinformatics for Dummies. Wiley, 2003. ISBN 0-7645-1696-5
  * Cristianini, N. and Hahn, M. Introduction to Computational Genomics, Cambridge University Press, 2006. (ISBN 9780521671910 | ISBN 0521671914)
  * Durbin, R., S. Eddy, A. Krogh and G. Mitchison, Biological sequence analysis. Cambridge University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-521-62971-3
  * Gilbert, D. Bioinformatics software resources. Briefings in Bioinformatics, Briefings in Bioinformatics, 2004 5(3):300-304.
  * Keedwell, E., Intelligent Bioinformatics: The Application of Artificial Intelligence Techniques to Bioinformatics Problems. Wiley, 2005. ISBN 0-470-02175-6
  * Kohane, et al. Microarrays for an Integrative Genomics. The MIT Press, 2002. ISBN 0-262-11271-X
  * Lund, O. et al. Immunological Bioinformatics. The MIT Press, 2005. ISBN 0-262-12280-4
  * Michael S. Waterman, Introduction to Computational Biology: Sequences, Maps and Genomes. CRC Press, 1995. ISBN 0-412-99391-0
  * Mount, David W. Bioinformatics: Sequence and Genome Analysis Spring Harbor Press, May 2002. ISBN 0-87969-608-7
  * Pachter, Lior and Sturmfels, Bernd. "Algebraic Statistics for Computational Biology" Cambridge University Press, 2005. ISBN 0-521-85700-7
  * Pevzner, Pavel A. Computational Molecular Biology: An Algorithmic Approach The MIT Press, 2000. ISBN 0-262-16197-4
  * Tisdall, James. "Beginning Perl for Bioinformatics" O'Reilly, 2001. ISBN 0-596-00080-4
  * Dedicated issue of Philosophical Transactions B on Bioinformatics freely available
  * Catalyzing Inquiry at the Interface of Computing and Biology (2005) CSTB report
  * Calculating the Secrets of Life: Contributions of the Mathematical Sciences and computing to Molecular Biology (1995)
  * Foundations of Computational and Systems Biology MIT Course
  * Computational Biology: Genomes, Networks, Evolution Free MIT Course
  * Algorithms for Computational Biology Free MIT Course
  * Zhang, Z., Cheung, K.H. and Townsend, J.P. Bringing Web 2.0 to bioinformatics, Briefing in Bioinformatics. In press

## [edit] External links

<IMG>

This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or
guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate
external links.  
<IMG>

Look up bioinformatics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Sister project At Wikiversity you can learn more and teach others about
Bioinformatics at:

The Department of Bioinformatics  
  * Major Organizations 
    * Bioinformatics Organization (Bioinformatics.Org): The Open-Access Institute
    * EMBnet
    * European Bioinformatics Institute
    * European Molecular Biology Laboratory
    * The International Society for Computational Biology
    * National Center for Biotechnology Information
    * National Institutes of Health homepage
    * Open Bioinformatics Foundation: umbrella non-profit organization supporting certain open-source projects in bioinformatics
    * Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics
    * Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

  * Major Journals 
    * Algorithms in Molecular Biology
    * Bioinformatics
    * BMC Bioinformatics
    * Briefings in Bioinformatics
    * Evolutionary Bioinformatics
    * Genome Research
    * The International Journal of Biostatistics
    * Journal of Computational Biology
    * Cancer Informatics
    * Journal of the Royal Society Interface
    * Molecular Systems Biology
    * PLoS Computational Biology
    * Statistical Applications in Genetic and Molecular Biology
    * Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics - IEEE/ACM
    * International Journal of Bioinformatics Research and Applications
    * List of Bioinformatics journals at Bioinformatics.fr
    * EMBnet.News at EMBnet.org
    * International Journal of Computational Biology and Drug Design (IJCBDD)
    * International Journal of Functional Informatics and Personalized Medicine (IJFIPM)

  * Other sites 
    * The Collection of Biostatistics Research Archive
    * Human Genome Project and Bioinformatics
    * List of Bioinformatics Research Groups at Bioinformatics.fr
    * List of Bioinformatics Research Groups at the Open Directory Project

  * Tutorials / Resources / Primers 
    * Bioinformatics - A Science Primer â by NCBI

v â¢ d â¢ e

Genomics topics  
Genome project Â· Paleopolyploidy Â· Glycomics Â· Human Genome Project Â·
Proteomics Â· Metabolomics Â· Chemogenomics Â· Structural genomics Â·
Pharmacogenetics Â· Pharmacogenomics Â· Toxicogenomics Â· Computational
genomics Â· Bioinformatics Â· Cheminformatics Â· Systems biology  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Major subfields of biology  
Anatomy Â· Astrobiology Â· Biochemistry Â· Biophysics Â· Bioinformatics Â·
Biostatistics Â· Botany Â· Cell biology Â· Chronobiology Â· Conservation
biology Â· Developmental biology Â· Ecology Â· Epidemiology Â· Evolutionary
biology Â· Genetics Â· Genomics Â· Human biology Â· Immunology Â· Marine
biology Â· Microbiology Â· Molecular biology Â· Neuroscience Â· Nutrition Â·
Origin of life Â· Paleontology Â· Parasitology Â· Pathology Â· Physiology Â·
Systems biology Â· Taxonomy Â· Zoology  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Major fields of technology  
Applied science

Archaeology Â· Artificial intelligence Â· Ceramic engineering Â· Computing Â·
Electronics Â· Energy Â· Energy storage Â· Engineering physics Â·
Environmental Engineering Science Â· Environmental technology Â· Fisheries
science Â· Materials science and engineering Â· Microtechnology Â·
Nanotechnology Â· Nuclear technology Â· Optics Â· Particle physics Â·
Zoography  
Information

Communication Â· Graphics Â· Information technology Â· Music Â· Speech
recognition Â· Visual technology Â· Systematics Â· Informatics  
Industry

Construction Â· Financial engineering Â· Fishing Â· Industrial technology Â·
Manufacturing Â· Machinery Â· Mining Â· Business informatics  
Military

Ammunition Â· Bombs Â· Combat engineering Â· Military technology Â· Military
technology and equipment Â· Naval engineering  
Domestic

Educational technology Â· Domestic appliances Â· Domestic technology Â· Food
technology  
Engineering

Aerospace Â· Agricultural Â· Architectural Â· Audio Â· Automotive Â·
Biological Â· Biochemical Â· Biomedical Â· BioTech Â· Broadcast Â· Building
officials Â· Ceramic Â· Chemical Â· Civil Â· Computer Â· Construction Â·
Control Â· Cryogenic Â· Electrical Â· Electronic Â· Engineering technology Â·
Enterprise Â· Environmental Â· Food Â· Genetic Â· Hydraulics Â· Industrial Â·
Materials Â· Mechanical Â· Mechatronics Â· Metallurgical Â· Mining Â· Naval Â·
Network Â· Nuclear Â· Ocean Â· Ontology Â· Optical Â· Petroleum Â· Radio
Frequency Â· Software Â· Structural Â· Systems Â· Technician Â· Textile Â·
Tissue Â· Transport Â· Traffic  
Health and safety

Biomedical Â· Bioinformatics Â· Biotechnology Â· Cheminformatics Â· Fire
protection engineering Â· Health technologies Â· Medical technology Â·
Nutrition Â· Pharmaceuticals Â· Safety engineering Â· Sanitary engineering  
Transport

Aerospace Â· Aerospace engineering Â· Automotive engineering Â· Marine
engineering Â· Motor vehicles Â· Space technology  
## [edit] See also

  * International Society of Intelligent Biological Medicine (ISIBM)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioinformatics"

Categories: Bioinformatics | Bioengineering | Biostatistics | Mathematical
biology | Computational biology | Formal sciences

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations | Wikipedia external
links cleanup

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Limburgs
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Novial
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * à·à·à¶à·à¶½
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 14:46.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



