
# Solid-state drive

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article is in need of attention from an expert on the subject.
WikiProject Computing or the Computing Portal may be able to help recruit one.
(May 2008)  
<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2008)  
This article is about flash-based, DRAM-based and other solid-state drives.
For other flash-based solid-state storage, see USB flash drive. For software
based secondary storage, see RAM disk.

<IMG>

<IMG>

An SSD in standard 2.5-inch (64 mm) form-factor.

<IMG>

<IMG>

DDR SDRAM based SSD

<IMG>

<IMG>

PCI attached IO Accelerator SSD

A solid-state drive (SSD) is a data storage device that uses solid-state
memory to store persistent data. An SSD emulates a hard disk drive interface,
thus easily replacing it in most applications. An SSD using SRAM or DRAM
(instead of flash memory) is often called a RAM-drive.

The original usage of the term solid-state (from solid-state physics) refers
to the use of semiconductor devices rather than electron tubes, but in this
context, has been adopted to distinguish solid-state electronics from
electromechanical devices as well. With no moving parts, solid-state drives
are less fragile than hard disks and are also silent (unless a cooling fan is
used); as there are no mechanical delays, they usually employ low access time
and latency.

SSDs have begun to appear in laptops,[1][2] although as of 2009 they are
substantially more expensive per unit of capacity than hard drives (US$500 for
a 256 GB SSD, vs. US$50 for a similar size external USB HDD[3]).

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Architecture and function
    * 2.1 Flash based drive
      * 2.1.1 SLC versus MLC
    * 2.2 DRAM based drive
  * 3 Comparison with hard disk drives
    * 3.1 Advantages
    * 3.2 Disadvantages
  * 4 Commercialization
    * 4.1 Cost and capacity
    * 4.2 Availability
  * 5 Applications
    * 5.1 Hybrid drive
    * 5.2 SSDs and Microsoft Windows
    * 5.3 SSDs and ZFS
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 Further reading
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] History

The first ferrite memory SSD devices, or auxiliary memory units as they were
called at the time, emerged during the era of vacuum tube computers.[citation
needed] But with the introduction of cheaper drum storage units, their use was
discontinued. Later, in the 1970s and 1980s, SSDs were implemented in
semiconductor memory for early supercomputers of IBM, Amdahl and Cray;[4]
however, the prohibitively high price of the built-to-order SSDs made them
quite seldom used.

In 1978 StorageTek developed the first modern type of solid-state drive. In
the mid-1980s Santa Clara Systems introduced BatRam, an array of 1 megabit DIP
RAM Chips and a custom controller card that emulated a hard disk. The package
included a rechargeable battery to preserve the memory chip contents when the
array was not powered. The Sharp PC-5000, introduced in 1983, used 128
kilobyte (128 KB) solid-state storage cartridges, containing bubble memory.

RAM "disks" were popular as boot media in the 1980s when hard drives were
expensive, floppy drives were slow, and a few systems, such as the Amiga
series, the Apple IIgs, and later the Macintosh Portable, supported such
booting. Tandy MS-DOS machines were equipped with DOS and DeskMate in ROM, as
well. At the cost of some main memory, the system could be soft-rebooted and
be back in the operating system in mere seconds instead of minutes. Some
systems were battery-backed so contents could persist when the system was shut
down.

In 1995 M-Systems introduced flash-based solid-state drives. (SanDisk acquired
M-Systems in November 2006). Since then, SSDs have been used successfully as
hard disk drive replacements by the military and aerospace industries, as well
as other mission-critical applications. These applications require the
exceptional mean time between failures (MTBF) rates that solid-state drives
achieve, by virtue of their ability to withstand extreme shock, vibration and
temperature ranges.

Enterprise Flash drives (EFDs) are designed for applications requiring high
performance (Input/Output Operations Per Second), reliability and energy
efficiency.

On September 25, 2007, Fusion-io announced the ioDrive to be available in Q4
2007,[5] with capacities of 80GB, 160GB and 320GB. The ioDrive actually did
not begin shipping until April 7, 2008.[6]

OCZ has recently demoed at Cebit 2009 a 1 TB flash SSD drive utilizing PCI
Express x8 interface, it achieves a minimum read speed of 654MB/s and maximum
read speed of 712MB/s.[7]

On March 2, 2009, Hewlett-Packard announced the HP StorageWorks IO
Accelerator, the world's first enterprise flash drive especially designed to
attach directly to the PCI fabric of a blade server. The mezzanine card, based
on Fusion-io's ioDrive technology, serves over 100,000 IOPS and up to 800MB/s
of bandwidth. HP provides the IO Accelerator in capacities of 80GB, 160GB and
320GB.[8]

## [edit] Architecture and function

An SSD is commonly composed of DRAM volatile memory or primarily NAND flash
non-volatile memory.[9]

### [edit] Flash based drive

Most SSD manufacturers use non-volatile flash memory to create more rugged and
compact devices for the consumer market. These flash memory-based SSDs, also
known as flash drives, do not require batteries. They are often packaged in
standard disk drive form factors (1.8-inch, 2.5-inch, and 3.5-inch). In
addition, non-volatility allows flash SSDs to retain memory even during sudden
power outages, ensuring data persistence. SSDs are slower than DRAM (and even
traditional HDDs on big files), but may perform better than hard drives (at
least with regard to reads) because of negligible seek time (flash SSDs have
no moving parts, and thus eliminate spin-up time, and greatly reduce seek
time, latency, and other delays inherent in conventional electro-mechanical
disks).

Components:

  * Cache: A flash based SSD uses a small amount of DRAM as a cache, similar to the cache in Hard disk drives. A directory of block placement and wear leveling data is also kept in the cache while the drive is operating.

  * Energy storage: Another component in higher performing SSDs is a capacitor or some form of batteries. These are necessary to maintain data integrity such that the data in the cache can be flushed to the drive when power is dropped; some may even hold power long enough to maintain data in the cache until power is resumed.

The performance of the SSD can scale with the number of parallel NAND flash
chips used in the device. A single NAND chip is relatively slow, due to narrow
(8/16 bit) asynchronous IO interface, and additional high latency of basic IO
operations (typical for SLC NAND - ~25 Î¼s to fetch a 4K page from the array
to the IO buffer on a read, ~250 Î¼s to commit a 4K page from the IO buffer to
the array on a write, ~2 ms to erase a 256 KB block). When multiple NAND
devices operate in parallel inside an SSD, the bandwidth scales, and the high
latencies can be hidden, as long as enough outstanding operations are pending
and the load is evenly distributed between devices.

Micron/Intel SSD made faster flash drives by implementing data striping
(similar to RAID0) and interleaving. This allowed creation of ultra-fast SSDs
with 250 MB/s effective read/write, the maximum the SATA interface can
manage.[10]

In 2008-03-31, Fusion-IO announced ioDrive, the company's first product, would
begin shipping on 2008-04-07.[11] It uses a PCI Express slot to overcome the
bandwidth limitation of SATA and SAS interfaces, and the 80GB unit has a read
speed of over 800MB/s and write speed of 694MB/s.[12]

#### [edit] SLC versus MLC

Lower priced drives usually use multi-level cell (MLC) flash memory, which is
slower and less reliable than single-level cell (SLC) flash memory.[13][14]
Still, MLC chips continue to be used in many commercially available SSDs, and
will be the future of the Mainstream SSDs, the controller compensating the
lifespan of the cells and the cache compensating the slower write
performances.

### [edit] DRAM based drive

See also: I-RAM and Hyperdrive (storage)

SSDs based on volatile memory such as DRAM are characterized by ultra fast
data access, generally less than 0.01 milliseconds, and are used primarily to
accelerate applications that would otherwise be held back by the latency of
Flash SDDs or traditional HDDs. DRAM-based SSDs usually incorporate internal
battery and backup storage systems to ensure data persistence while no power
is being supplied to the drive from external sources. If power is lost, the
battery provides power while all information is copied from random access
memory (RAM) to back-up storage. When the power is restored, the information
is copied back to the RAM from the back-up storage, and the SSD resumes normal
operation. (Similar to the hibernate function used in modern operating
systems.)

These types of SSD are usually fitted with the same type of DRAM modules used
in regular PCs and servers, allowing them to be swapped out and replaced with
larger modules.

A secondary computer with a fast network or (direct) Infiniband connection can
be used as a RAM-based SSD.[15]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Open casing of 2.5â traditional hard disk drive (left) and solid-state drive
(center).

DRAM based solid-state drives are especially useful on computers that already
have the maximum amount of supported RAM. For example, some computer systems
built on the x86-32 architecture can effectively be extended beyond the 4 GB
limit by putting the paging file or swap file on an SSD. Owing to the
bandwidth bottleneck of the bus they connect to, DRAM SSDs cannot read and
write data as fast as main RAM can, but they are far faster than any
mechanical hard drive. Placing the swap/scratch files on a RAM SSD, as opposed
to a traditional hard drive, therefore can increase performance significantly.

## [edit] Comparison with hard disk drives

A comparison (with benchmarks) of SSDs, Secure Digital High Capacity (SDHC)
drives, and hard disk drives (HDDs) is given in the reference.[16]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The disassembled components of a hard disk drive (left) and of the PCB and
components of a solid-state drive (right).

Comparisons reflect typical characteristics, and may not hold for a specific
device.

### [edit] Advantages

  * Faster start-up, as no spin-up is required (RAM & flash).
  * Typically, fast random access for reading, as there is no read/write head to move (RAM & flash).[17]
    * Extremely low read latency times, as SSD seek-times are orders of magnitude lower than the best hard disk drives, as of 2008.[18] (RAM) In applications where hard disk seeks are the limiting factor, this results in faster boot and application launch times (see Amdahl's law)[19] (RAM & flash).
    * Relatively deterministic read performance:[20] unlike hard disk drives, performance of SSDs is almost constant and deterministic across the entire storage. This is because the seek time is almost constant and does not depend on the physical location of the data, and so, file fragmentation has almost no impact on read performance.
  * No noise: a lack of moving parts makes SSDs completely silent, apart from cooling fans on a few high-end and high-capacity SSDs.
  * For low-capacity flash SSDs, low power consumption and heat production when in active use, although high-end SSDs and DRAM-based SSDs may have significantly higher power requirements (flash).
  * High mechanical reliability, as the lack of moving parts almost eliminates the risk of "mechanical" failure (RAM & flash). 
    * Ability to endure extreme shock, high altitude, vibration and extremes of temperature: once again because there are no moving parts.[21] This makes SSDs useful for laptops, mobile computers, and devices that operate in extreme conditions (flash).[19]
  * Larger range of operating temperatures. Typical hard drives have an operating range of 5-55 degrees C. Most flash drives can operate at 70 degrees, and some industrial grade drives can operate over an even wider temperature range.[22]
  * For low-capacity SSDs, lower weight and size: although size and weight per unit storage are still better for traditional hard drives, and microdrives allow up to 20 GB storage in a CompactFlash 42.8Ã36.4Ã5 mm (1.7Ã1.4Ã.2 in) form-factor. Up to 256 GB, as of 2008 SSDs are lighter than hard drives of the same capacity.[21]
  * When failures occur, they tend to happen predominantly while writing, or erasing cells, rather than upon reading cells. With magneto-mechanical drives, failures tend to occur while reading. If a drive detects failure on write operations, data can be written to a new location. If a drive fails on read, then data is usually lost permanently.[23]

### [edit] Disadvantages

  * Cost: As of mid-2008, SSD prices are still considerably higher per gigabyte than are comparable conventional hard drives: consumer grade drives are typically US$2.00 to US$3.45 per GB[13][24] for flash drives and over US$80.00 per GB for RAM-based compared to about US$0.38 or less per gigabyte for hard drives.[13]
  * Capacity: As of 2008, far lower than that of conventional hard drives (Flash SSD capacity is predicted to increase rapidly, with experimental drives of 1 TB,[25][26], hard drive capacity also continues to expand, and hard drives are likely to maintain their capacity edge for some time).[27]
    * Lower storage density: Hard disks can store more data per unit volume than DRAM or flash SSDs, except for very low capacity/small devices.
  * Limited write (erase) cycles: Flash-memory cells will often wear out after 1,000 to 10,000 write cycles for MLC, and up to 100,000 write cycles for SLC[13], while high endurance cells may have an endurance of 1â5 million write cycles (many log files, file allocation tables, and other commonly used parts of the file system exceed this over the lifetime of a computer).[28][29][30] Special file systems or firmware designs can mitigate this problem by spreading writes over the entire device (so-called wear leveling), rather than rewriting files in place.[31] In 2008 wear leveling was just beginning to be incorporated into consumer level devices.[13] However, effective write cycles can be much less, because when a write request is made to a particular memory block, all data in the block is overwritten even when only part of the memory is altered. The write amplification, as referred by Intel, can be reduced using write memory buffer.[32] In combination with wear leveling, over-provisioning SSD flash drives with spared memory capacity also delays the loss of user-accessible memory capacity. NAND memory can be negatively impacted by read and program (write) disturbs arising from over accessing a particular NAND location. This overuse of NAND locations causes bits within the NAND block to erroneously change values. Wear leveling, by redirecting SSD writes to lesser-used NAND locations, thus reduces the potential for program or write disturbs.[33] An example for the lifetime of SSD is explained in detail in this wiki.[dubious â discuss] SSDs based on DRAM, however, do not suffer from this problem. 
    * As a result of wear leveling and write combining, the performance of SSDs degrades with use [34][35]. Eventually, wear leveling will use each page on the drive at least once, so further writes always involve a block erase. Although write combining (if supported by the device) offers advantages, it causes internal fragmentation in the SSD which degrades the sequential read speed. Such fragmentation cannot be mitigated by the operating system.
  * Slower write speeds: As erase blocks on flash-based SSDs generally are quite large (e.g. 0.5 - 1 megabyte)[13], they are far slower than conventional disks during small writes (the smaller, the worse) and can suffer from write fragmentation,[36] and in some cases for sequential writes.[19] SSDs based on DRAM, which do this several orders of magnitude faster than conventional disks, do not suffer from this problem.
  * DRAM based SSD require more power than hard disks, when operating; and they still use power when the computer is turned off, while hard disks do not.[37]

## [edit] Commercialization

### [edit] Cost and capacity

Until recently,[when?] flash based solid-state drives were too costly for
widespread use in mobile computing.[citation needed] As flash manufacturers
transition from NOR flash to single-level cell (SLC) NAND flash and most
recently to multi-level cell (MLC) NAND flash to maximize silicon die usage
and reduce associated costs, "solid-state disks" are now being more accurately
renamed "solid-state drives" â they have no disks but function as drives â
for mobile computing in the enterprise and consumer electronics space. This
technological trend is accompanied by an annual 50% decline in raw flash
material costs, while capacities continue to double at the same rate. As a
result, flash-based solid-state drives are becoming increasingly popular in
markets such as notebook PCs and sub-notebooks for enterprises, Ultra-Mobile
PCs (UMPC), and Tablet PCs for the healthcare and consumer electronics
sectors. Major PC companies have now started to offer such technology.

### [edit] Availability

Solid-state drive (SSD) technology has been marketed to the military and niche
industrial markets since the mid-1990s[citation needed].

<IMG>

<IMG>

CompactFlash card used as SSD

Along with the emerging enterprise market, SSDs have been appearing in ultra-
mobile PCs and a few lightweight laptop systems, adding significantly to the
price of the laptop, depending on the capacity, form factor and transfer
speeds. As of 2008 some manufacturers have begun shipping affordable, fast,
energy-efficient drives priced at $350 to computer manufacturers.[citation
needed] For low-end applications, a USB flash drive may be obtained for $10 to
$100 or so, depending on capacity, or a CompactFlash card may be paired with a
CF-to-IDE or CF-to-SATA converter at a similar cost. Either of these requires
that write-cycle endurance issues be managed, either by not storing frequently
written files on the drive, or by using a Flash file system. Standard
CompactFlash cards usually have write speeds of 7 to 15 megabytes per second
while the more expensive upmarket cards claim speeds of up to 40 MB/s.

One of the first mainstream releases of SSD was the XO Laptop, built as part
of the 'One Laptop Per Child' project. Mass production of these computers,
built for children in developing countries, began in December 2007. These
machines use 1024 MiB SLC NAND flash as primary storage which is considered
more suitable for the harsher than normal conditions in which they are
expected to be used. Dell began shipping ultra-portable laptops with SanDisk
SSDs on April 26, 2007.[1] Asus released the Eee PC subnotebook on October 16
2007, and after a successful commercial start in 2007, expects to ship several
million PCs in 2008, with 2, 4 or 8 gigabytes of flash memory.[38] On January
31, 2008, Apple Inc. released the MacBook Air, a thin laptop with optional 64
GB SSD. The Apple store cost was $999 more for this option, as compared to
that of an 80 GB 4200 rpm Hard Disk Drive.[2] Another option - Lenovo ThinkPad
X300 with a 64Gbyte SSD - was announced by Lenovo in February 2008,[39] and
is, as of 2008, available to consumers in some countries. (Now X301 with
128GB).

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Mtron SSD

As of October 14, 2008, Apple's MacBook and MacBook Pro lines carry optional
solid state hard drives at an additional cost. Dell began to offer optional
256 GB solid state drives on select notebook models in January 2009.

## [edit] Applications

A use for flash drives is to run lightweight operating systems designed
specifically for turning general-purpose PCs into network appliances
comparable to more expensive routers and firewalls. In this situation, a write
protected flash drive containing the whole operating system is used to boot
the system. A similar system could boot from CD, floppy disk or a traditional
hard drive but flash memory is a good choice because of very low power
consumption and failure rate.

### [edit] Hybrid drive

Main article: Hybrid drive

A hybrid disk uses an SSD as a buffer for a larger hard disk drive. The hard
disk may be spun down more of the time if data is available in the SSD.

NAND Flash based SSDs offer a potential power savings, however the typical
pattern of usage of normal operations result in cache misses in the NAND Flash
as well leading to continued spin of the drive platter or much longer latency
if the drive needed to spin up.[citation needed] These devices would be
slightly more energy efficient but could not prove to be any better in
performance.[citation needed]

DRAM-based SSDs may also work as a buffer cache mechanism (see hybrid RAM
drive). When data are written to memory, the corresponding block in memory is
marked as dirty, and all dirty blocks can be flushed to the actual hard drive
based on the following criteria:

  1. Time (e.g., every 10 seconds, flush all dirty data);
  2. Threshold (when the ratio of dirty data to SSD size exceeds some predetermined value, flush the dirty data).
  3. Loss of power/computer shutdown.

### [edit] SSDs and Microsoft Windows

Windows is optimized for hard disk drives rather than SSDs.[40][41] Microsoft
created ReadyBoost to exploit characteristics of USB-connected flash devices,
but Windows operating systems are not optimized for use of SSDs. Microsoft's
latest OS Windows 7 which is still in beta, is optimized for SSDs[42] as well
as hard disks.

### [edit] SSDs and ZFS

Solaris, as of 10u6 (released in October 2008), and recent versions of
OpenSolaris and Solaris Express Community Edition on which OpenSolaris is
based, can use SSD drives as a performance booster for ZFS. There are two
available modes -- using an SSD for the ZFS Intent Log (ZIL), which is used
every time a write to the disk occurs, or for the L2ARC (Level 2 Adaptive
Replacement Cache), which is used to cache data for reading. When used either
alone or in combination, large increases in performance are generally seen.

## [edit] See also

  * Hybrid drive \- A hard disk which uses a solid-state drive to improve performance.
  * Computer storage
  * Flash file system
  * List of solid-state drives

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Aughton, Simon (2007-04-25). "Dell Gets Flash With SSD Option for Laptops". IT PRO. http://www.itpro.co.uk/111350/dell-gets-flash-with-ssd-option-for-laptops.
  2. ^ a b Macbook Air Specifications
  3. ^ http://www.pricewatch.com/hard_removable_drives/
  4. ^ IBM User's Guide, Thirteenth Edition
  5. ^ http://www.fusionio.com/PDFs/Pressrelease_SANinhand.pdf
  6. ^ http://www.fusionio.com/PDFs/Storage_pressrelease_final.pdf
  7. ^ http://www.tomshardware.com/news/OCZ-Z-Drive-RAID,7181.html
  8. ^ http://h18006.www1.hp.com/products/storageworks/io_accelerator/index.html?jumpid=reg_R1002_USEN
  9. ^ What is a Solid State Disk?
  10. ^ Flash SSD with 250 MB/s writing speed
  11. ^ Fusion-io Announces Breakthrough in Storage with Availability of the Company's ioDrive.
  12. ^ Review of the Fusion-IO IODrive 80GB SSD
  13. ^ a b c d e f Lucas Mearian (August 27, 2008). "Solid-state disk lackluster for laptops, PCs". http://www.computerworld.com/action/article.do?command=printArticleBasic&articleId=9112065. Retrieved on 2009-03-11.
  14. ^ Are MLC SSDs Ever Safe in Enterprise Apps?
  15. ^ RIndMA Disk
  16. ^ Jackson, Jerry (2008-02-17). "SDHC Cards vs Hard Drive vs SSD". NotebookReview.com, TechTarget. http://www.notebookreview.com/default.asp?newsID=4258.
  17. ^ Markoff, John (2008-12-11). "Computing Without a Whirring Drive". The New York Times: p. B9. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/11/technology/personaltech/11basics.html. "Using a standard Macintosh performance measurement utility called Xbench, the Intel solid-state drive increased the computerâs overall performance by almost half. Disk performance increased fivefold."
  18. ^ Radding, Alan. "Solid-state storage finds its niche". StorageSearch.com. http://searchstorage.techtarget.com/magazineFeature/0,296894,sid5_gci1281598,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-29. Registration required.
  19. ^ a b c Meyev, Aleksey (2008 -04-23). "SSD, i-RAM and Traditional Hard Disk drives". X-bit labs. http://www.xbitlabs.com/articles/storage/display/ssd-iram.html.
  20. ^ AnandTech: Super Talent SSD: 16GB of Solid State Goodness
  21. ^ a b "SSD vs HDD". SAMSUNG Semiconductor. http://www.samsung.com/global/business/semiconductor/products/flash/Products_FlashSSD.html.
  22. ^ "Memoright SSDs: The End of Hard drives?". http://www.tomshardware.com/reviews/ssd-memoright,1926-2.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-05.
  23. ^ "Performance Showdown: SSDs vs HDDs". http://hardware.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=08/04/29/1528205.
  24. ^ Shah, Agam (2008-05-30). "Seagate plans SSD, 2 TB hard drive for next year". Computerworld. http://www.computerworld.com/action/article.do?command=viewArticleBasic&taxonomyName=storage&articleId=9091258&taxonomyId=19&intsrc=kc_top. Retrieved on 2008-05-30.
  25. ^ "Imperial Technology Announces One Terabyte SSD". Imperial Technology Inc. http://www.taborcommunications.com/dsstar/03/0304/105524.html.
  26. ^ Solid Data Systems, Inc. (2007-07-17). SDS Offers 1TB SSD. Press release. http://www.byteandswitch.com/document.asp?doc_id=129251.
  27. ^ "Flash Memory vs. Hard Disk drives - Which Will Win?". http://www.storagesearch.com/semico-art1.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-17.
  28. ^ Kerekes, Zsolt. "SSD Myths and Legends - "write endurance"". StorageSearch.com. http://www.storagesearch.com/ssdmyths-endurance.html.
  29. ^ No SWAP Partition, Journaling Filesystems, â¦ on a SSD?
  30. ^ SSDâs, Journaling, and noatime/relatime
  31. ^ Corbet, Jonathon (2007-05-15). "LogFS". Linux Weekly News. http://lwn.net/Articles/234441/.
  32. ^ Inside the X25-M Controller: Wear Leveling, Write Amplification Control
  33. ^ SSD flash drives enter the enterprise
  34. ^ "The SSD Anthology: Understanding SSDs and New Drives from OCZ". AnandTech.com. 2009-03-18. http://www.anandtech.com/printarticle.aspx?i=3531.
  35. ^ "Long-term performance analysis of Intel Mainstream SSDs". PC Perspective. 2009-02-13. http://www.pcper.com/article.php?aid=669&type=expert&pid=1.
  36. ^ Dumitru, Douglas (2007-08-16). "Understanding Flash SSD Performance" (PDF). EasyCo LLC. http://www.storagesearch.com/easyco-flashperformance-art.pdf.
  37. ^ Schmid, Patrick (2007-11-07). "HyperDrive 4 Redefines Solid State Storage : HyperDrive 4 - The Fastest Hard Disk In The World?". Tom's Hardware. http://www.tomshardware.com/2007/11/07/hyperdrive_4_redefines_solid_state_storage/.
  38. ^ Chen, Shu-Ching Jean (2007-06-07). "$199 Laptop Is No Child's Play". Forbes. http://www.forbes.com/markets/2007/06/07/intel-asustek-laptop-markets-equity-cx_jc_0606markets3.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-28.
  39. ^ Lenovo (2008-02-26). Road Warriors Get Ready â Lenovo Delivers "No Compromises" Ultraportable ThinkPad X300 Notebook PC. Press release. http://www.lenovo.com/news/us/en/2008/02/x300.html.
  40. ^ Tony Smith. "If your SSD sucks, blame Vista, says SSD vendor". http://www.reghardware.co.uk/2008/07/22/sandisk_ssd_vista_beef/. Retrieved on 2008-10-11.
  41. ^ "Samsung, Microsoft in talks to speed up SSDs on Vista". http://www.computerworld.com/action/article.do?command=viewArticleBasic&articleId=9111939. Retrieved on 2008-09-22.
  42. ^ >David Flynn. "Windows 7 gets SSD-friendly". http://apcmag.com/windows_7_gets_ssdfriendly.htm. Retrieved on 2009-1-29.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Netbook Trends and Solid-State Technology Forecast. pricegrabber.com. pp. 7. https://mr.pricegrabber.com/Netbook_Trends_and_SolidState_Technology_January_2009_CBR.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-01-28.

## [edit] External links

History

  * STORAGEsearch.com

Products Currently Available

  * SANDirect.com - SSD and NAND Devices

Technology Adoption

  * JEDEC Continues SSD Standardization Efforts

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solid-state_drive"

Categories: Solid-state computer storage media

Hidden categories: Computing articles needing expert attention | Articles
needing expert attention since May 2008 | Articles needing additional
references from April 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles
with unsourced statements since August 2008 | All pages needing cleanup |
Articles with disputed statements from August 2008 | Vague or ambiguous time |
Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles with
unsourced statements since December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 03:55 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



