
# Sonification

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Sonification is the use of non-speech audio to convey information or
perceptualize data. Due to the specifics of auditory perception, such as
temporal and pressure resolution, it forms an interesting alternative to
visualization techniques, gaining importance in various disciplines. It has
been well established for a long time already as Auditory Display in
situations that require a constant awareness of some information (e.g. vital
body functions during an operation). Sonification as a method for exploration
of data and scientific modeling is a current and ongoing research desideratum.

One of the first successful applications of sonification is the well-known
Geiger counter, a device measuring ionizing radiation. The number and
frequency of audible clicks are directly dependent on the radiation level in
the immediate vicinity of the device.

  

## Contents

  * 1 Fields
  * 2 Some existing applications
  * 3 Sonification techniques
  * 4 External links

  
## [edit] Fields

Sonification is an interdisciplinary field combining:

  * algorithmic composition / sound art
  * epistemology and sociology of science
  * physics
  * physiology
  * psychology
  * mathematics and computer science
  * sound engineering
  * statistics

## [edit] Some existing applications

  * Geiger counter
  * Sonar
  * medical and cockpit auditory displays
  * Auditory thermometer [1]
  * Volcanic activity detection
  * auditory altimeter[2], also used in skydiving

## [edit] Sonification techniques

Many different components can be altered to change the user's perception of
the sound, and in turn, their perception of the underlying information being
portrayed. Often, an increase or decrease in some level in this information in
indicated by an increase or decrease in pitch, amplitude or tempo, but could
also be indicated by varying other less commonly used components. For example,
a stock market price could be portrayed by rising pitch as the stock price
rose, and lowering pitch as it fell. To allow the user to determine that more
than one stock was being portrayed, different timbres or brightnesses might be
used for the different stocks, or they may be played to the user from
different points in space, for example, through different sides of their
headphones.

Many studies have been undertaken to try to find the best techniques for
various types of information to be presented, and as yet, no conclusive set of
techniques to be used has been formulated. As the area of sonification is
still considered to be in its infancy, current studies are working towards
determining the best set of sound components to vary in different situations.

Several different techniques for rendering auditory data representations can
be categorized:

  * Audification
  * Earcons
  * Auditory Icons
  * Parameter Mapping Sonification
  * Model-Based Sonification

## [edit] External links

  * International Community for Auditory Display
  * Sonification Report (1997) provides an introduction to the status of the field and current research agendas.
  * SonEnvir general sonification environment
  * Sonification.de provides information about Sonification and Auditory Display, links to interesting event and related projects
  * Sonification for Exploratory Data Analysis, PhD Thesis by Thomas Hermann 2002, developing Model Based Sonfication.
  * Sonification of Mobile and Wireless Communications
  * Interactive Sonification a hub to news and upcoming events in the field of interactive sonification
  * iSIC iSIC (Information Music) - a musical sonification of data in complex systems.
  * CodeSounding â a Java library for runtime sonification of Java source code structures (blocks, if, for, etc.) â The sonification is obtained by post-processing the source files: runtime sounds are a function of how was structured the source code of the running program
  * LYCAY, a Java library for sonification of Java source code
  * WebMelody, a system for sonification of activity of web servers.
  * Sonification of a Cantor set [3]
  * Volcanoes may reveal secrets through 'song' (New Scientist)
  * Sound of science (New Scientist) discusses many applications of sonification
  * Sonification Sandbox v.3.0, a Java program to convert datasets to sounds, GT Sonification Lab, School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology.
  * Infrasound Laboratory of Hawaii (sounds)
  * xSonify a Java application to display numerical data as sound, Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA
  * Program Sonification using Java, an online chapter (with code) explaining how to implement sonification using speech synthesis, MIDI note generattion, and audio clips.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sonification"

Categories: Multimodal interaction | Display technology | Knowledge discovery
in databases | Auditory displays

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 May 2009, at 02:18 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



