
# Persistent data structure

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

It has been suggested that the section Examples of purely functional data
structures from the article Purely functional be merged into this article or
section. (Discuss)  
In computing, a persistent data structure is a data structure which always
preserves the previous version of itself when it is modified; such data
structures are effectively immutable, as their operations do not (visibly)
update the structure in-place, but instead always yield a new updated
structure. A persistent data structure is not a data structure committed to
persistent storage, such as a disk; this is a different and unrelated sense of
the word "persistent."

A data structure is partially persistent if all versions can be accessed but
only the newest version can be modified. The data structure is fully
persistent if every version can be both accessed and modified. If there is
also a meld or merge operation that can create a new version from two previous
versions, the data structure is called confluently persistent. Structures that
are not persistent are called ephemeral.

These types of data structures are particularly common in logical and
functional programming, and in a purely functional program all data is
immutable, so all data structures are automatically fully persistent.
Persistent data structures can also be created using in-place updating of data
and these may, in general, use less time or storage space than their purely
functional counterparts.

While persistence can be achieved by simple copying, this is inefficient in
time and space, because most operations make only small changes to a data
structure. A better method is to exploit the similarity between the new and
old versions to share structure between them, such as using the same subtree
in a number of tree structures. However, because it rapidly becomes infeasible
to determine how many previous versions share which parts of the structure,
and because it is often desirable to discard old versions, this necessitates
an environment with garbage collection.

Perhaps the simplest persistent data structure is the singly-linked list or
cons-based list, a simple list of objects formed by each carrying a reference
to the next in the list. This is persistent because we can take a tail of the
list, meaning the last k items for some k, and add new nodes on to the front
of it. The tail will not be duplicated, instead becoming shared between both
the old list and the new list. So long as the contents of the tail are
immutable, this sharing will be invisible to the program.

Many common reference-based data structures, such as red-black trees, and
queues, can easily be adapted to create a persistent version.

## [edit] See also

  * Persistence (computer science)
  * Navigational Database

## [edit] References

  * Making Data Structures Persistent (or Author's version)
  * Persistent Data Structures (survey)
  * Fully persistent arrays for efficient incremental updates and voluminous reads
  * Real-Time Deques, Multihead Turing Machines, and Purely Functional Programming

* * *
Comp Sci logo This data structure-related article is a stub. You can help
Wikipedia by expanding it.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Persistent_data_structure"

Categories: Data structures | Persistence | Data structure stubs

Hidden categories: Articles to be merged since November 2007 | All articles to
be merged

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 29 June 2008, at 21:08 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



