
# Schizophrenia

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Schizophrenia (disambiguation).

Semi-protected

Schizophrenia  
Classification and external resources  
<IMG>  
Eugen Bleuler (1857â1939) coined the term "Schizophrenia" in 1908  
ICD-10 F20.  
ICD-9 295  
OMIM 181500  
DiseasesDB 11890  
MedlinePlus 000928  
eMedicine med/2072 emerg/520  
MeSH F03.700.750  
Schizophrenia (pronounced /ËskÉªtsÉËfrÉniÉ/ or pronounced
/ËskÉªtsÉËfriËniÉ/), from the Greek roots skhizein (ÏÏÎ¯Î¶ÎµÎ¹Î½, "to
split") and phrÄn, phren- (ÏÏÎ®Î½, ÏÏÎµÎ½-, "mind") is a psychiatric
diagnosis that describes a mental disorder characterized by abnormalities in
the perception or expression of reality. It most commonly manifests as
auditory hallucinations, paranoid or bizarre delusions, or disorganized speech
and thinking with significant social or occupational dysfunction. Onset of
symptoms typically occurs in young adulthood,[1] with approximately
0.4â0.6%[2][3] of the population affected. Diagnosis is based on the
patient's self-reported experiences and observed behavior. No laboratory test
for schizophrenia currently exists.[4]

Studies suggest that genetics, early environment, neurobiology, psychological
and social processes are important contributory factors; some recreational and
prescription drugs appear to cause or worsen symptoms. Current psychiatric
research is focused on the role of neurobiology, but no single organic cause
has been found. Due to the many possible combinations of symptoms, there is
debate about whether the diagnosis represents a single disorder or a number of
discrete syndromes. For this reason, Eugen Bleuler termed the disease the
schizophrenias (plural) when he coined the name. Despite its etymology,
schizophrenia is not the same as dissociative identity disorder, previously
known as multiple personality disorder or split personality. Schizophrenia has
been commonly and erroneously confused with multiple personality order.[5]

Increased dopamine activity in the mesolimbic pathway of the brain is
consistently found in schizophrenic individuals. The mainstay of treatment is
antipsychotic medication; this type of drug primarily works by suppressing
dopamine activity. Dosages of antipsychotics are generally lower than in the
early decades of their use. Psychotherapy, and vocational and social
rehabilitation are also important. In more serious casesâwhere there is risk
to self and othersâinvoluntary hospitalization may be necessary, although
hospital stays are less frequent and for shorter periods than they were in
previous times.[6]

The disorder is thought to mainly affect cognition, but it also usually
contributes to chronic problems with behavior and emotion. People with
schizophrenia are likely to have additional (comorbid) conditions, including
major depression and anxiety disorders;[7] the lifetime occurrence of
substance abuse is around 40%. Social problems, such as long-term
unemployment, poverty and homelessness, are common. Furthermore, the average
life expectancy of people with the disorder is 10 to 12 years less than those
without, due to increased physical health problems and a higher suicide
rate.[8]

## Contents

  * 1 Signs and symptoms
    * 1.1 Schneiderian classification
    * 1.2 Positive and negative symptoms
  * 2 Diagnosis
    * 2.1 Standardized criteria
    * 2.2 Confusion with other conditions
    * 2.3 Subtypes
    * 2.4 Controversies and research directions
  * 3 Epidemiology
  * 4 Causes
    * 4.1 Genetic
    * 4.2 Prenatal
    * 4.3 Social
    * 4.4 Drugs
  * 5 Mechanisms
    * 5.1 Psychological
    * 5.2 Neural
  * 6 Treatment and services
    * 6.1 Medication
    * 6.2 Psychological and social interventions
    * 6.3 Other
  * 7 Prognosis
    * 7.1 Course
    * 7.2 Defining recovery
    * 7.3 Predictors
    * 7.4 Mortality
    * 7.5 Violence
  * 8 Screening and prevention
  * 9 Alternative approaches
    * 9.1 Schizophrenia as a social construct
    * 9.2 Other proposed causes
    * 9.3 Alternative medical treatments
  * 10 History
  * 11 Society and culture
    * 11.1 Stigma
    * 11.2 Iconic cultural depictions
  * 12 References
  * 13 Further reading
  * 14 External links

  
## Signs and symptoms

A person diagnosed with schizophrenia may demonstrate auditory hallucinations,
delusions, and disorganized and unusual thinking and speech; this may range
from loss of train of thought and subject flow, with sentences only loosely
connected in meaning, to incoherence, known as word salad, in severe cases.
Social isolation commonly occurs for a variety of reasons. Impairment in
social cognition is associated with schizophrenia, as are symptoms of paranoia
from delusions and hallucinations, and the negative symptoms of avolition
(apathy or lack of motivation). In one uncommon subtype, the person may be
largely mute, remain motionless in bizarre postures, or exhibit purposeless
agitation; these are signs of catatonia. No one sign is diagnostic of
schizophrenia, and all can occur in other medical and psychiatric
conditions.[4] The current classification of psychoses holds that symptoms
need to have been present for at least one month in a period of at least six
months of disturbed functioning. A schizophrenia-like psychosis of shorter
duration is termed a schizophreniform disorder.[4]

Late adolescence and early adulthood are peak years for the onset of
schizophrenia. These are critical periods in a young adult's social and
vocational development, and they can be severely disrupted. To minimize the
effect of schizophrenia, much work has recently been done to identify and
treat the prodromal (pre-onset) phase of the illness, which has been detected
up to 30 months before the onset of symptoms, but may be present longer.[9]
Those who go on to develop schizophrenia may experience the non-specific
symptoms of social withdrawal, irritability and dysphoria in the prodromal
period,[10] and transient or self-limiting psychotic symptoms in the prodromal
phase before psychosis becomes apparent.[11]

### Schneiderian classification

The psychiatrist Kurt Schneider (1887â1967) listed the forms of psychotic
symptoms that he thought distinguished schizophrenia from other psychotic
disorders. These are called first-rank symptoms or Schneider's first-rank
symptoms, and they include delusions of being controlled by an external force;
the belief that thoughts are being inserted into or withdrawn from one's
conscious mind; the belief that one's thoughts are being broadcast to other
people; and hearing hallucinatory voices that comment on one's thoughts or
actions or that have a conversation with other hallucinated voices.[12]
Although they have significantly contributed to the current diagnostic
criteria, the specificity of first-rank symptoms has been questioned. A review
of the diagnostic studies conducted between 1970 and 2005 found that these
studies allow neither a reconfirmation nor a rejection of Schneider's claims,
and suggested that first-rank symptoms be de-emphasized in future revisions of
diagnostic systems.[13]

### Positive and negative symptoms

Schizophrenia is often described in terms of positive and negative (or
deficit) symptoms.[14] The term Positive symptoms refers to symptoms that most
individuals do not normally experience. They include delusions, auditory
hallucinations, and thought disorder, and are typically regarded as
manifestations of psychosis. Negative symptoms are so-named because they are
considered to be the loss or absence of normal traits or abilities, and
include features such as flat or blunted affect and emotion, poverty of speech
(alogia), inability to experience pleasure (anhedonia), and lack of motivation
(avolition). Despite the appearance of blunted affect, recent studies indicate
that there is often a normal or even heightened level of emotionality in
schizophrenia, especially in response to stressful or negative events.[15] A
third symptom grouping, the disorganization syndrome, is commonly described,
and includes chaotic speech, thought, and behavior. There is evidence for a
number of other symptom classifications.[16]

## Diagnosis

Schizophrenia is diagnosed on the basis of symptom profiles. No neuroscience
correlates yet provide useful enough criteria.[17] Diagnosis is based on the
self-reported experiences of the person, and abnormalities in behavior
reported by family members, friends or co-workers, followed by a clinical
assessment by a psychiatrist, social worker, clinical psychologist or other
mental health professional. Psychiatric assessment includes a psychiatric
history and some form of mental status examination.

### Standardized criteria

The most widely used standardized criteria for diagnosing schizophrenia come
from the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders, version DSM-IV-TR, and the World Health Organization's
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems, the ICD-10. The latter criteria are typically used in European
countries while the DSM criteria are used in the United States and the rest of
the world, as well as prevailing in research studies. The ICD-10 criteria put
more emphasis on Schneiderian first rank symptoms although, in practice,
agreement between the two systems is high.[18]

According to the revised fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR), to be diagnosed with schizophrenia,
three diagnostic criteria must be met.[4]

  1. Characteristic symptoms: Two or more of the following, each present for much of the time during a one-month period (or less, if symptoms remitted with treatment). 
    * Delusions
    * Hallucinations
    * Disorganized speech, which is a manifestation of formal thought disorder
    * Grossly disorganized behavior (e.g. dressing inappropriately, crying frequently) or catatonic behavior
    * Negative symptomsâaffective flattening (lack or decline in emotional response), alogia (lack or decline in speech), or avolition (lack or decline in motivation)
    If the delusions are judged to be bizarre, or hallucinations consist of hearing one voice participating in a running commentary of the patient's actions or of hearing two or more voices conversing with each other, only that symptom is required above. The speech disorganization criterion is only met if it is severe enough to substantially impair communication.
  2. Social/occupational dysfunction: For a significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, one or more major areas of functioning such as work, interpersonal relations, or self-care, are markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset.
  3. Duration: Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least six months. This six-month period must include at least one month of symptoms (or less, if symptoms remitted with treatment).

Schizophrenia cannot be diagnosed if symptoms of mood disorder or pervasive
developmental disorder are present, or the symptoms are the direct result of a
general medical condition or a substance, such as abuse of a drug or
medication.

### Confusion with other conditions

Psychotic symptoms may be present with several other psychiatric illnesses,
including bipolar disorder,[19] borderline personality disorder,[20]
schizoaffective disorder, drug intoxication, brief drug-induced psychosis, and
schizophreniform disorder. A more general medical and neurological examination
may be needed to rule out medical illnesses which may rarely produce psychotic
schizophrenia-like symptoms,[4] such as metabolic disturbance, systemic
infection, syphilis, HIV infection, epilepsy, and brain lesions. It may be
necessary to rule out a delirium, which can be distinguished by visual
hallucinations, acute onset and fluctuating level of consciousness, and
indicates an underlying medical illness. Investigations are not generally
repeated for relapse unless there is a specific medical indication or possible
adverse effects from antipsychotic medication.

"Schizophrenia" does not mean dual personality, despite the etymology of the
word (Greek ÏÏÎ¯Î¶Ï = "I split").

### Subtypes

The DSM-IV-TR contains five sub-classifications of schizophrenia.

  * Paranoid type: Where delusions and hallucinations are present but thought disorder, disorganized behavior, and affective flattening are absent. (DSM code 295.3/ICD code F20.0)
  * Disorganized type: Named hebephrenic schizophrenia in the ICD. Where thought disorder and flat affect are present together. (DSM code 295.1/ICD code F20.1)
  * Catatonic type: The subject may be almost immobile or exhibit agitated, purposeless movement. Symptoms can include catatonic stupor and waxy flexibility. (DSM code 295.2/ICD code F20.2)
  * Undifferentiated type: Psychotic symptoms are present but the criteria for paranoid, disorganized, or catatonic types have not been met. (DSM code 295.9/ICD code F20.3)
  * Residual type: Where positive symptoms are present at a low intensity only. (DSM code 295.6/ICD code F20.5)

The ICD-10 defines two additional subtypes.

  * Post-schizophrenic depression: A depressive episode arising in the aftermath of a schizophrenic illness where some low-level schizophrenic symptoms may still be present. (ICD code F20.4)
  * Simple schizophrenia: Insidious and progressive development of prominent negative symptoms with no history of psychotic episodes. (ICD code F20.6)

### Controversies and research directions

Part of a larger controversy over biopsychiatry, the validity of schizophrenia
as a diagnostic entity has been criticised by number of psychologists as
lacking in scientific validity and diagnostic reliability.[21][22] In 2006, a
group of patients and mental health professionals from the UK, under the
banner of Campaign for Abolition of the Schizophrenia Label, argued for a
rejection of the diagnosis of schizophrenia based on its heterogeneity and
associated stigma, and called for the adoption of a bio-psychosocial model.
Other UK psychiatrists opposed the move arguing that the term schizophrenia is
a useful, even if provisional concept.[23][24]

The discrete category of schizophrenia used in the DSM has also been
criticized.[25] As with other psychiatric disorders, some psychiatrists have
suggested that the diagnosis would be better addressed as individual
dimensions along which everyone varies, such that there is a spectrum or
continuum rather than a cut-off between normal and ill. This approach appears
consistent with research on schizotypy, and with a relatively high prevalence
of psychotic experiences, mostly non-distressing delusional beliefs, among the
general public.[26][27][28] In concordance with this observation, psychologist
Edgar Jones, and psychiatrists Tony David and Nassir Ghaemi, surveying the
existing literature on delusions, pointed out that the consistency and
completeness of the definition of delusion have been found wanting by many;
delusions are neither necessarily fixed, nor false, nor involve the presence
of incontrovertible evidence.[29][30][31]

Nancy Andreasen, a leading figure in schizophrenia research, has criticized
the current DSM-IV and ICD-10 criteria for sacrificing validity for the sake
of improving diagnostic reliability. She argues that overemphasis on psychosis
in the diagnostic criteria, while improving diagnostic reliability, ignores
more fundamental cognitive impairments that are harder to assess due to large
variations in presentation.[32][33] This view is supported by other
psychiatrists.[34] In the same vein, Ming Tsuang and colleagues argue that
psychotic symptoms may be a common end-state in a variety of disorders,
including schizophrenia, rather than a reflection of the specific etiology of
schizophrenia, and warn that there is little basis for regarding DSMâs
operational definition as the "true" construct of schizophrenia.[25]
Neuropsychologist Michael Foster Green went further in suggesting the presence
of specific neurocognitive deficits may be used to construct phenotypes that
are alternatives to those that are purely symptom-based. These deficits take
the form of a reduction or impairment in basic psychological functions such as
memory, attention, executive function and problem solving.[35][36]

The exclusion of affective components from the criteria for schizophrenia,
despite their ubiquity in clinical settings, has also become a bone of
contention. This exclusion in the DSM has resulted in a "rather convoluted"
separate disorderâschizoaffective disorder.[34] Citing poor interrater
reliability, some psychiatrists have totally contested the concept of
schizoaffective disorder as a separate entity.[37][38] The categorical
distinction between mood disorders and schizophrenia, known as the
Kraepelinian dichotomy, has also been challenged by data from genetic
epidemiology.[39]

## Epidemiology

Schizophrenia occurs equally in males and females, although typically appears
earlier in menâthe peak ages of onset are 20â28 years for males and
26â32 years for females.[1] Onset in childhood is much rarer,[40] as is
onset in middle- or old age.[41] The lifetime prevalence of
schizophreniaâthe proportion of individuals expected to experience the
disease at any time in their livesâis commonly given at 1%. However, a 2002
systematic review of many studies found a lifetime prevalence of 0.55%.[3]
Despite the received wisdom that schizophrenia occurs at similar rates
worldwide, its prevalence varies across the world,[42] within countries,[43]
and at the local and neighbourhood level.[44] One particularly stable and
replicable finding has been the association between living in an urban
environment and schizophrenia diagnosis, even after factors such as drug use,
ethnic group and size of social group have been controlled for.[45]
Schizophrenia is known to be a major cause of disability. In a 1999 study of
14 countries, active psychosis was ranked the third-most-disabling condition
after quadriplegia and dementia and ahead of paraplegia and blindness.[46]

## Causes

Main article: Causes of schizophrenia

<IMG>

Data from a PET study[47] suggests that the less the frontal lobes are
activated (red) during a working memory task, the greater the increase in
abnormal dopamine activity in the striatum (green), thought to be related to
the neurocognitive deficits in schizophrenia.

While the reliability of the diagnosis introduces difficulties in measuring
the relative effect of genes and environment (for example, symptoms overlap to
some extent with severe bipolar disorder or major depression), evidence
suggests that genetic and environmental factors can act in combination to
result in schizophrenia.[48] Evidence suggests that the diagnosis of
schizophrenia has a significant heritable component but that onset is
significantly influenced by environmental factors or stressors.[49] The idea
of an inherent vulnerability (or diathesis) in some people, which can be
unmasked by biological, psychological or environmental stressors, is known as
the stress-diathesis model.[50] The idea that biological, psychological and
social factors are all important is known as the "biopsychosocial" model.

### Genetic

Estimates of the heritability of schizophrenia tend to vary owing to the
difficulty of separating the effects of genetics and the environment although
twin studies have suggested a high level of heritability.[51] It has been
suggested that schizophrenia is a condition of complex inheritance, with
several genes possibly interacting to generate risk for schizophrenia or the
separate components that can co-occur leading to a diagnosis.[52] These genes
appear to be non-specific, in that they may raise the risk of developing other
psychiatric disorders such as bipolar disorder.[53] However, recent
metaanalyses of linkage studies have produced conflicting findings.[54]
Larger-scale, thus more sensitive genome-wide association studies are being
conducted.[55] Schizophrenia has also been associated with rare deletions or
duplications of tiny DNA sequences (known as copy number variants)
disproportionately occurring within genes involved in neuronal signaling and
brain development.[56][57]

There is little doubt about the existence of a fecundity deficit in
schizophrenia. Affected individuals have fewer children than the population as
a whole. This reduction is of the order of 70% in males and 30% in females.
The central genetic paradox of schizophrenia is why if the disease is
associated with a biological disadvantage is this variation not selected out?
To balance such a significant disadvantage, a substantial and universal
advantage must be exist. Insofar, all theories of a putative advantage were
disproved or remain unsubstantiated.[58][59]

### Prenatal

Causal factors are thought to initially come together in early
neurodevelopment to increase the risk of later developing schizophrenia. One
curious finding is that people diagnosed with schizophrenia are more likely to
have been born in winter or spring, (at least in the northern hemisphere).[60]
There is now evidence that prenatal exposure to infections increases the risk
for developing schizophrenia later in life, providing additional evidence for
a link between in utero developmental pathology and risk of developing the
condition.[61]

### Social

Living in an urban environment has been consistently found to be a risk factor
for schizophrenia.[62][45] Social disadvantage has been found to be a risk
factor, including poverty[63] and migration related to social adversity,
racial discrimination, family dysfunction, unemployment or poor housing
conditions.[64] Childhood experiences of abuse or trauma have also been
implicated as risk factors for a diagnosis of schizophrenia later in
life.[65][66] Parenting is not held responsible for schizophrenia but
unsupportive dysfunctional relationships may contribute to an increased
risk.[67][68]

### Drugs

See also: Dual diagnosis

Although about half of all patients with schizophrenia abuse drugs or alcohol,
a clear causal connection between drug use and schizophrenia has been
difficult to prove. The two most often used explanations for this are
"substance use causes schizophrenia" and "substance use is a consequence of
schizophrenia", and they both may be correct.[69] A 2007 meta-analysis
estimated that cannabis use is statistically associated with a dose-dependent
increase in risk of development of psychotic disorders, including
schizophrenia.[70] There is little evidence to suggest that other drugs such
as alcohol cause psychosis, or that psychotic individuals choose specific
drugs to self-medicate; there is some support for the theory that they use
drugs to cope with unpleasant states such as depression, anxiety, boredom and
loneliness.[71]

## Mechanisms

### Psychological

A number of psychological mechanisms have been implicated in the development
and maintenance of schizophrenia. Cognitive biases that have been identified
in those with a diagnosis or those at risk, especially when under stress or in
confusing situations, include excessive attention to potential threats,
jumping to conclusions, making external attributions, impaired reasoning about
social situations and mental states, difficulty distinguishing inner speech
from speech from an external source, and difficulties with early visual
processing and maintaining concentration.[72][73][74][75] Some cognitive
features may reflect global neurocognitive deficits in memory, attention,
problem-solving, executive function or social cognition, while others may be
related to particular issues and experiences.[76][67] Despite a common
appearance of "blunted affect", recent findings indicate that many individuals
diagnosed with schizophrenia are highly emotionally responsive, particularly
to stressful or negative stimuli, and that such sensitivity may cause
vulnerability to symptoms or to the disorder.[15][77][78] Some evidence
suggests that the content of delusional beliefs and psychotic experiences can
reflect emotional causes of the disorder, and that how a person interprets
such experiences can influence symptomatology.[79][80][81][82] The use of
"safety behaviors" to avoid imagined threats may contribute to the chronicity
of delusions.[83] Further evidence for the role of psychological mechanisms
comes from the effects of therapies on symptoms of schizophrenia.[84]

### Neural

Studies using neuropsychological tests and brain imaging technologies such as
fMRI and PET to examine functional differences in brain activity have shown
that differences seem to most commonly occur in the frontal lobes, hippocampus
and temporal lobes.[85] These differences have been linked to the
neurocognitive deficits often associated with schizophrenia.[86]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Functional magnetic resonance imaging and other brain imaging technologies
allow for the study of differences in brain activity among people diagnosed
with schizophrenia

Particular focus has been placed upon the function of dopamine in the
mesolimbic pathway of the brain. This focus largely resulted from the
accidental finding that a drug group which blocks dopamine function, known as
the phenothiazines, could reduce psychotic symptoms. It is also supported by
the fact that amphetamines, which triggers the release of dopamine may
exacerbate the psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia.[87] An influential theory,
known as the Dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia, proposed that excess
activation of D2 receptors was the cause of (the positive symptoms of)
schizophrenia. Although postulated for about 20 years based on the D2 blockade
effect common to all antipsychotics, it was not until the mid-1990s that PET
and SPET imaging studies provided supporting evidence. This theory is now
thought to be overly simplistic as a complete explanation, partly because
newer antipsychotic medication (called atypical antipsychotic medication) can
be equally effective as older medication (called typical antipsychotic
medication), but also affects serotonin function and may have slightly less of
a dopamine blocking effect.[88]

Interest has also focused on the neurotransmitter glutamate and the reduced
function of the NMDA glutamate receptor in schizophrenia. This has largely
been suggested by abnormally low levels of glutamate receptors found in
postmortem brains of people previously diagnosed with schizophrenia[89] and
the discovery that the glutamate blocking drugs such as phencyclidine and
ketamine can mimic the symptoms and cognitive problems associated with the
condition.[90] The fact that reduced glutamate function is linked to poor
performance on tests requiring frontal lobe and hippocampal function and that
glutamate can affect dopamine function, all of which have been implicated in
schizophrenia, have suggested an important mediating (and possibly causal)
role of glutamate pathways in schizophrenia.[91] Positive symptoms fail
however to respond to glutamatergic medication.[92]

There have also been findings of differences in the size and structure of
certain brain areas in schizophrenia. A 2006 metaanlaysis of MRI studies found
that whole brain and hippocampal volume are reduced and that ventricular
volume is increased in patients with a first psychotic episode relative to
healthy controls. The average volumetric changes in these studies are however
close to the limit of detection by MRI methods, so it remains to be determined
whether schizophrenia is a neurodegenerative process that begins at about the
time of symptom onset, or whether it is better characterised as a
neurodevelopmental process that produces abnormal brain volumes at an early
age.[93] In first episode psychosis typical antipsychotics like haloperidol
were associated with significant reductions in gray matter volume, whereas
atypical antipsychotics like olanzapine were not.[94] Studies in non-human
primates found gray and white matter reductions for both typical and atypical
antipsychotics.[95]

A 2009 meta-analysis of diffusion tensor imaging studies identified two
consistent locations of fractional anisotropy reduction in schizophrenia. One
region, in the left frontal lobe, is traversed by white matter tracts
interconnecting the frontal lobe, thalamus and cingulate gyrus; the second
region in the temporal lobe, is traversed by white matter tracts
interconnecting the frontal lobe, insula, hippocampusâamygdala, temporal and
occipital lobe. The authors suggest that two networks of white matter tracts
may be affected in schizophrenia, with the potential for "disconnection" of
the gray matter regions which they link.[96] During fMRI studies, greater
connectivity in the brain's default network and task-positive network has been
observed in schizophrenic patients, and may reflect excessive orientation of
attention to introspection and to extrospection, respectively. The greater
anti-correlation between the two networks suggests excessive rivalry between
the networks.[97]

## Treatment and services

Main article: Treatment of schizophrenia

<IMG>

<IMG>

Molecule of chlorpromazine, which revolutionized treatment of schizophrenia in
the 1950s

The concept of a cure as such remains controversial, as there is no consensus
on the definition, although some criteria for the remission of symptoms have
recently been suggested.[98] The effectiveness of schizophrenia treatment is
often assessed using standardized methods, one of the most common being the
Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS).[99] Management of symptoms and
improving function is thought to be more achievable than a cure. Treatment was
revolutionized in the mid-1950s with the development and introduction of
chlorpromazine.[100] A recovery model is increasingly adopted, emphasizing
hope, empowerment and social inclusion.[101]

Hospitalization may occur with severe episodes of schizophrenia. This can be
voluntary or (if mental health legislation allows it) involuntary (called
civil or involuntary commitment). Long-term inpatient stays are now less
common due to deinstitutionalization, although can still occur.[6] Following
(or in lieu of) a hospital admission, support services available can include
drop-in centers, visits from members of a community mental health team or
Assertive Community Treatment team, supported employment[102] and patient-led
support groups.

In many non-Western societies, schizophrenia may only be treated with more
informal, community-led methods. Multiple international surveys by the World
Health Organization over several decades have indicated that the outcome for
people diagnosed with schizophrenia in non-Western countries is on average
better there than for people in the West.[103] Many clinicians and researchers
suspect the relative levels of social connectedness and acceptance are the
difference,[104] although further cross-cultural studies are seeking to
clarify the findings.

### Medication

<IMG>

This article's factual accuracy may be compromised due to out-of-date
information. Please help improve the article by updating it. There may be
information on the talk page.  
The first line psychiatric treatment for schizophrenia is antipsychotic
medication.[105] These can reduce the positive symptoms of psychosis. Most
antipsychotics take around 7â14 days to have their main effect. Currently
available antipsychotics fail however to significantly ameliorate the negative
symptoms, and the improvements on cognition may be attributed to the practice
effect.[106][107][108][109]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Risperidone (trade name Risperdal) is a common atypical antipsychotic
medication

Although expensive, the newer atypical antipsychotic drugs are usually
preferred for initial treatment over the older typical antipsychotic, although
they are more likely to induce weight gain and obesity-related diseases.[110]
Prolactin elevations have been reported in women with schizophrenia taking
atypical antipsychotics.[111] It remains unclear whether the newer
antipsychotics reduce the chances of developing neuroleptic malignant
syndrome, a rare but serious and potentially fatal neurological disorder most
often caused by an adverse reaction to neuroleptic or antipsychotic
drugs.[112]

The two classes of antipsychotics are generally thought equally effective for
the treatment of the positive symptoms. Some researchers have suggested that
the atypicals offer additional benefit for the negative symptoms and cognitive
deficits associated with schizophrenia, although the clinical significance of
these effects has yet to be established. Recent reviews have refuted the claim
that atypical antipsychotics have fewer extrapyramidal side effects than
typical antipsychotics, especially when the latter are used in low doses or
when low potency antipsychotics are chosen.[113]

Response of symptoms to medication is variable: treatment-resistant
schizophrenia is a term used for the failure of symptoms to respond
satisfactorily to at least two different antipsychotics.[114] Patients in this
category may be prescribed clozapine,[115] a medication of superior
effectiveness but several potentially lethal side effects including
agranulocytosis and myocarditis.[116] Clozapine may have the additional
benefit of reducing propensity for substance abuse in schizophrenic
patients.[117] For other patients who are unwilling or unable to take
medication regularly, long-acting depot preparations of antipsychotics may be
given every two weeks to achieve control. The United States and Australia are
two countries with laws allowing the forced administration of this type of
medication on those who refuse but are otherwise stable and living in the
community. Some findings have found that in the longer-term some individuals
may do better not taking antipsychotics.[118]

A 2003 review of four randomized controlled trials of EPA (an omega-3 fatty
acid) vs. placebo as adjunctive treatment for schizophrenia found that two of
the trials detected a significant improvement on positive and negative
symptoms, and suggested that EPA may be an effective adjunct to
antipsychotics.[119] The most recent meta-analysis (2006) failed however to
find a significant effect.[120] A 2007 review found that studies of omega-3
fatty acids in schizophrenia, despite being mostly of high quality, have
produced inconsistent results and small effect sizes of doubtful clinical
significance.[121]

### Psychological and social interventions

Psychotherapy is also widely recommended and used in the treatment of
schizophrenia, although services may often be confined to pharmacotherapy
because of reimbursement problems or lack of training.[122]

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is used to target specific symptoms and
improve related issues such as self-esteem, social functioning, and insight.
Although the results of early trials were inconclusive[123] as the therapy
advanced from its initial applications in the mid 1990s, more recent reviews
clearly show CBT is an effective treatment for the psychotic symptoms of
schizophrenia[124][125] Another approach is cognitive remediation therapy, a
technique aimed at remediating the neurocognitive deficits sometimes present
in schizophrenia. Based on techniques of neuropsychological rehabilitation,
early evidence has shown it to be cognitively effective, with some
improvements related to measurable changes in brain activation as measured by
fMRI.[126] A similar approach known as cognitive enhancement therapy, which
focuses on social cognition as well as neurocognition, has shown
efficacy.[127]

Family therapy or education, which addresses the whole family system of an
individual with a diagnosis of schizophrenia, has been consistently found to
be beneficial, at least if the duration of intervention is longer-
term.[128][129][130] Aside from therapy, the impact of schizophrenia on
families and the burden on carers has been recognized, with the increasing
availability of self-help books on the subject.[131][132] There is also some
evidence for benefits from social skills training, although there have also
been significant negative findings.[133][134] Some studies have explored the
possible benefits of music therapy and other creative
therapies.[135][136][137]

The Soteria model is alternative to inpatient hospital treatment using a
minimal medication approach. It is described as a milieu-therapeutic recovery
method, characterized by its founder as "the 24 hour a day application of
interpersonal phenomenologic interventions by a nonprofessional staff, usually
without neuroleptic drug treatment, in the context of a small, homelike,
quiet, supportive, protective, and tolerant social environment."[138] Although
research evidence is limited, a 2008 systematic review found the programme
equally as effective as treatment with medication in people diagnosed with
first and second episode schizophrenia.[139]

### Other

Electroconvulsive therapy is not considered a first line treatment but may be
prescribed in cases where other treatments have failed. It is more effective
where symptoms of catatonia are present,[140] and is recommended for use under
NICE guidelines in the UK for catatonia if previously effective, though there
is no recommendation for use for schizophrenia otherwise.[141] Psychosurgery
has now become a rare procedure and is not a recommended treatment.[142]

Service-user led movements have become integral to the recovery process in
Europe and the United States; groups such as the Hearing Voices Network and
the Paranoia Network have developed a self-help approach that aims to provide
support and assistance outside the traditional medical model adopted by
mainstream psychiatry. By avoiding framing personal experience in terms of
criteria for mental illness or mental health, they aim to destigmatize the
experience and encourage individual responsibility and a positive self-image.
Partnerships between hospitals and consumer-run groups are becoming more
common, with services working toward remediating social withdrawal, building
social skills and reducing rehospitalization.[143]

## Prognosis

### Course

<IMG>

<IMG>

John Nash, a US mathematician, began showing signs of paranoid schizophrenia
during his college years. Despite having stopped taking his prescribed
medication, Nash continued his studies and was awarded the Nobel Prize in
1994. His life was depicted in the 2001 film A Beautiful Mind.

Coordinated by the World Health Organization and published in 2001, The
International Study of Schizophrenia (ISoS) was a long-term follow-up study of
1633 individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia around the world. The striking
difference in course and outcomes was noted; a half of those available for
follow-up had a favourable outcome and 16% had a delayed recovery after an
early unremitting course. More usually, the course in the first two years
predicted the long-term course. Early social intervention was also related to
a better outcome. The findings were held as important in moving patients,
carers and clinicians away from the prevalent belief of the chronic nature of
the condition.[144] A review of major longitudinal studies in North America
noted this variation in outcomes, although outcome was on average worse than
for other psychotic and psychiatric disorders. A moderate number of patients
with schizophrenia were seen to remit and remain well; the review raised the
question that some may not require maintenance medication.[145]

A clinical study using strict recovery criteria (concurrent remission of
positive and negative symptoms and adequate social and vocational functioning
continuously for two years) found a recovery rate of 14% within the first five
years.[146] A 5-year community study found that 62% showed overall improvement
on a composite measure of clinical and functional outcomes.[147]

World Health Organization studies have noted that individuals diagnosed with
schizophrenia have much better long-term outcomes in developing countries
(India, Colombia and Nigeria) than in developed countries (United States,
United Kingdom, Ireland, Denmark, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Japan, and
Russia),[148] despite antipsychotic drugs not being widely available.

### Defining recovery

Rates are not always comparable across studies because exact definitions of
remission and recovery have not been widely established. A "Remission in
Schizophrenia Working Group" has proposed standardized remission criteria
involving "improvements in core signs and symptoms to the extent that any
remaining symptoms are of such low intensity that they no longer interfere
significantly with behavior and are below the threshold typically utilized in
justifying an initial diagnosis of schizophrenia".[149] Standardized recovery
criteria have also been proposed by a number of different researchers, with
the stated DSM definitions of a "complete return to premorbid levels of
functioningâ or "complete return to full functioning" seen as inadequate,
impossible to measure, incompatible with the variability in how society
defines normal psychosocial functioning, and contributing to self-fulfilling
pessimism and stigma.[150] Some mental health professionals may have quite
different basic perceptions and concepts of recovery than individuals with the
diagnosis, including those in the consumer/survivor movement.[151] One notable
limitation of nearly all the research criteria is failure to address the
person's own evaluations and feelings about their life. Schizophrenia and
recovery often involve a continuing loss of self-esteem, alienation from
friends and family, interruption of school and career, and social stigma,
"experiences that cannot just be reversed or forgotten".[101] An increasingly
influential model defines recovery as a process, similar to being "in
recovery" from drug and alcohol problems, and emphasizes a personal journey
involving factors such as hope, choice, empowerment, social inclusion and
achievement.[101]

### Predictors

Several factors have been associated with a better overall prognosis: Being
female, rapid (vs. insidious) onset of symptoms, older age of first episode,
predominantly positive (rather than negative) symptoms, presence of mood
symptoms, and good pre-illness functioning.[152][153] The strengths and
internal resources of the individual concerned, such as determination or
psychological resilience, have also been associated with better
prognosis.[145] The attitude and level of support from people in the
individual's life can have a significant impact; research framed in terms of
the negative aspects of thisâthe level of critical comments, hostility, and
intrusive or controlling attitudes, termed high 'Expressed emotion'âhas
consistently indicated links to relapse.[154] Most research on predictive
factors is correlational in nature, however, and a clear cause-and-effect
relationship is often difficult to establish.

### Mortality

In a study of over 168,000 Swedish citizens undergoing psychiatric treatment,
schizophrenia was associated with an average life expectancy of approximately
80â85% of that of the general population; women were found to have a
slightly better life expectancy than men, and a diagnosis of schizophrenia was
associated with an overall better life expectancy than substance abuse,
personality disorder, heart attack and stroke.[155] Other identified factors
include smoking, poor diet, little exercise and the negative health effects of
psychiatric drugs.[8]

There is a higher than average suicide rate associated with schizophrenia.
This has been cited at 10%, but a more recent analysis of studies and
statistics revises the estimate at 4.9%, most often occurring in the period
following onset or first hospital admission.[156] Several times more attempt
suicide.[157] There are a variety of reasons and risk factors.[158][159]

### Violence

The relationship between violent acts and schizophrenia is a contentious
topic. Current research indicates that the percentage of people with
schizophrenia who commit violent acts is higher than the percentage of people
without any disorder, but lower than is found for disorders such as
alcoholism, and the difference is reduced or not found in same-neighbourhood
comparisons when related factors are taken into account, notably
sociodemographic variables and substance misuse.[160] Studies have indicated
that 5% to 10% of those charged with murder in Western countries have a
schizophrenia spectrum disorder.[161][162][163]

The occurrence of psychosis in schizophrenia has sometimes been linked to a
higher risk of violent acts. Findings on the specific role of delusions or
hallucinations have been inconsistent, but have focused on delusional
jealousy, perception of threat and command hallucinations. It has been
proposed that a certain type of individual with schizophrenia may be most
likely to offend, characterized by a history of educational difficulties, low
IQ, conduct disorder, early-onset substance misuse and offending prior to
diagnosis.[161]

Individuals with a diagnosis of schizophrenia are often the victims of violent
crimeâat least 14 times more often than they are perpetrators.[164][165]
Another consistent finding is a link to substance misuse, particularly
alcohol,[166] among the minority who commit violent acts. Violence by or
against individuals with schizophrenia typically occurs in the context of
complex social interactions within a family setting,[167] and is also an issue
in clinical services[168] and in the wider community.[169]

## Screening and prevention

There are no reliable markers for the later development of schizophrenia
although research is being conducted into how well a combination of genetic
risk plus non-disabling psychosis-like experience predicts later
diagnosis.[170] People who fulfill the 'ultra high-risk mental state'
criteria, that include a family history of schizophrenia plus the presence of
transient or self-limiting psychotic experiences, have a 20â40% chance of
being diagnosed with the condition after one year.[171] The use of
psychological treatments and medication has been found effective in reducing
the chances of people who fulfill the 'high-risk' criteria from developing
full-blown schizophrenia.[172] However, the treatment of people who may never
develop schizophrenia is controversial[173] , in light of the side-effects of
antipsychotic medication; particularly with respect to the potentially
disfiguring tardive dyskinesia and the rare but potentially lethal neuroleptic
malignant syndrome.[174] The most widely used form of preventative health care
for schizophrenia takes the form of public education campaigns that provide
information on risk factors and early symptoms, with the aim to improve
detection and provide treatment earlier for those experiencing delays.[175]
The new clinical approach early intervention in psychosis is a secondary
prevention strategy to prevent further episodes and prevent the long term
disability associated with schizophrenia.

## Alternative approaches

### Schizophrenia as a social construct

An approach broadly known as the anti-psychiatry movement, most active in the
1960s, opposes the orthodox medical view of schizophrenia as an illness.[176]
Psychiatrist Thomas Szasz argued that psychiatric patients are not ill, but
rather individuals with unconventional thoughts and behavior that make society
uncomfortable.[177] He argues that society unjustly seeks to control them by
classifying their behavior as an illness and forcibly treating them as a
method of social control. According to this view, "schizophrenia" does not
actually exist but is merely a form of social construction, created by
society's concept of what constitutes normality and abnormality. Szasz has
never considered himself to be "anti-psychiatry" in the sense of being against
psychiatric treatment, but simply believes that treatment should be conducted
between consenting adults, rather than imposed upon anyone against his or her
will.

### Other proposed causes

Main article: Causes of schizophrenia

Psychiatrists R. D. Laing, Silvano Arieti, Theodore Lidz and others have
argued that the symptoms of what is called mental illness are comprehensible
reactions to impossible demands that society and particularly family life
places on some sensitive individuals. Laing, Arieti and Lidz were notable in
valuing the content of psychotic experience as worthy of interpretation,
rather than considering it simply as a secondary and essentially meaningless
marker of underlying psychological or neurological distress. Laing described
eleven case studies of people diagnosed with schizophrenia and argued that the
content of their actions and statements was meaningful and logical in the
context of their family and life situations.[178] In 1956, Palo Alto, Gregory
Bateson and his colleagues Paul Watzlawick, Donald Jackson, and Jay Haley[179]
articulated a theory of schizophrenia, related to Laing's work, as stemming
from double bind situations where a person receives different or contradictory
messages. Madness was therefore an expression of this distress and should be
valued as a cathartic and transformative experience. In the books
Schizophrenia and the Family and The Origin and Treatment of Schizophrenic
Disorders Lidz and his colleagues explain their belief that parental behaviour
can result in mental illness in children. Arieti's Interpretation of
Schizophrenia won the 1975 scientific National Book Award in the United
States.

The concept of schizophrenia as a result of civilization has been developed
further by psychologist Julian Jaynes in his 1976 book The Origin of
Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind; he proposed that until
the beginning of historic times, schizophrenia or a similar condition was the
normal state of human consciousness.[180] This would take the form of a
"bicameral mind" where a normal state of low affect, suitable for routine
activities, would be interrupted in moments of crisis by "mysterious voices"
giving instructions, which early people characterized as interventions from
the gods. Researchers into shamanism have speculated that in some cultures
schizophrenia or related conditions may predispose an individual to becoming a
shaman;[181] the experience of having access to multiple realities is not
uncommon in schizophrenia, and is a core experience in many shamanic
traditions. Equally, the shaman may have the skill to bring on and direct some
of the altered states of consciousness psychiatrists label as illness.
Psychohistorians, on the other hand, accept the psychiatric diagnoses.
However, unlike the current medical model of mental disorders they may argue
that poor parenting in tribal societies causes the shaman's schizoid
personalities.[182] Commentators such as Paul Kurtz and others have endorsed
the idea that major religious figures experienced psychosis, heard voices and
displayed delusions of grandeur.[183]

Psychiatrist Tim Crow has argued that schizophrenia may be the evolutionary
price we pay for a left brain hemisphere specialization for language.[184]
Since psychosis is associated with greater levels of right brain hemisphere
activation and a reduction in the usual left brain hemisphere dominance, our
language abilities may have evolved at the cost of causing schizophrenia when
this system breaks down. Other approaches have linked schizophrenia to
psychological dissociation[185] or states of awareness and identity understood
from phenomenological and other perspectives.[186][187]

### Alternative medical treatments

Orthomolecular psychiatry considers schizophrenia to be a group of disorders,
some of which can be treated with megadoses of nutrients,[188] such as vitamin
B-3 (Niacin).[189] Proponents of orthomolecular psychiatry claim that an
adverse reaction to gluten is involved in the etiology of some cases. This
theoryâdiscussed by one author in three British journals in the
1970s[190]âis unproven. A 2006 literature review suggests that gluten may be
a factor for patients with celiac disease and for a subset of patients
afflicted with schizophrenia, but that further study is needed to conclusively
confirm such a link.[191] In a 2004 Israeli study, anti-gluten antibodies were
measured in 50 patients with schizophrenia and a matched control group. All
antibody tests in both groups were negative leading to the conclusion that "it
is unlikely that there is an association between gluten sensitivity and
schizophrenia".[192] Some researchers suggest that dietary and nutritional
treatments may hold promise in the treatment of schizophrenia.[193]

## History

Accounts of a schizophrenia-like syndrome are thought to be rare in the
historical record prior to the 1800s, although reports of irrational,
unintelligible, or uncontrolled behavior were common.[194] There has been an
interpretation that brief notes in the Ancient Egyptian Ebers papyrus may
imply schizophrenia,[195] but other reviews have not suggested any
connection.[196] A review of ancient Greek and Roman literature indicated that
although psychosis was described, there was no account of a condition meeting
the criteria for schizophrenia.[197] Bizarre psychotic beliefs and behaviors
similar to some of the symptoms of schizophrenia were reported in Arabic
medical and psychological literature during the Middle Ages. In The Canon of
Medicine, for example, Avicenna described a condition somewhat resembling the
symptoms of schizophrenia which he called Junun Mufrit (severe madness), which
he distinguished from other forms of madness (Junun) such as mania, rabies and
manic depressive psychosis.[198] However, no condition resembling
schizophrenia was reported in Åerafeddin SabuncuoÄlu's Imperial Surgery, a
major Islamic medical textbook of the 15th century.[199] Given limited
historical evidence, schizophrenia (as prevalent as it is today) may be a
modern phenomenon, or alternatively it may have been obscured in historical
writings by related concepts such as melancholia or mania.[194]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Emil Kraepelin (1856â1926) refined the concept of psychosis.

A detailed case report in 1797 concerning James Tilly Matthews, and accounts
by Phillipe Pinel published in 1809, are often regarded as the earliest cases
of schizophrenia in the medical and psychiatric literature.[194] Schizophrenia
was first described as a distinct syndrome affecting teenagers and young
adults by BÃ©nÃ©dict Morel in 1853, termed dÃ©mence prÃ©coce (literally 'early
dementia'). The term dementia praecox was used in 1891 by Arnold Pick to in a
case report of a psychotic disorder. In 1893 Emil Kraepelin introduced a broad
new distinction in the classification of mental disorders between dementia
praecox and mood disorder (termed manic depression and including both unipolar
and bipolar depression). Kraepelin believed that dementia praecox was
primarily a disease of the brain,[200] and particularly a form of dementia,
distinguished from other forms of dementia, such as Alzheimer's disease, which
typically occur later in life.[201] Kraepelin's classification slowly gained
acceptance. There were objections to the use of the term "dementia" despite
cases of recovery, and some defence of diagnoses it replaced such as
adolescent insanity.[202]

The word schizophreniaâwhich translates roughly as "splitting of the mind"
and comes from the Greek roots schizein (ÏÏÎ¯Î¶ÎµÎ¹Î½, "to split") and
phrÄn, phren- (ÏÏÎ®Î½, ÏÏÎµÎ½-, "mind")[203]âwas coined by Eugen
Bleuler in 1908 and was intended to describe the separation of function
between personality, thinking, memory, and perception. Bleuler described the
main symptoms as 4 A's: flattened Affect, Autism, impaired Association of
ideas and Ambivalence.[204] Bleuler realized that the illness was not a
dementia as some of his patients improved rather than deteriorated and hence
proposed the term schizophrenia instead.

The term schizophrenia is commonly misunderstood to mean that affected persons
have a "split personality". Although some people diagnosed with schizophrenia
may hear voices and may experience the voices as distinct personalities,
schizophrenia does not involve a person changing among distinct multiple
personalities. The confusion arises in part due to the meaning of Bleuler's
term schizophrenia (literally "split" or "shattered mind"). The first known
misuse of the term to mean "split personality" was in an article by the poet
T. S. Eliot in 1933.[205]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Scratch-drawings on the wall in St. Elizabeths Hospital made by a patient with
"a disturbed case of dementia praecox".

In the first half of the twentieth century schizophrenia was considered to be
a hereditary defect, and sufferers were subject to eugenics in many countries.
Hundreds of thousands were sterilized, with or without consentâthe majority
in Nazi Germany, the United States, and Scandinavian countries.[206][207]
Along with other people labeled "mentally unfit", many diagnosed with
schizophrenia were murdered in the Nazi "Action T4" program.[208]

In the early 1970s, the diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia was the subject
of a number of controversies which eventually led to the operational criteria
used today. It became clear after the 1971 US-UK Diagnostic Study that
schizophrenia was diagnosed to a far greater extent in America than in
Europe.[209] This was partly due to looser diagnostic criteria in the US,
which used the DSM-II manual, contrasting with Europe and its ICD-9. David
Rosenhan's 1972 study, published in the journal Science under the title On
being sane in insane places, concluded that the diagnosis of schizophrenia in
the US was often subjective and unreliable.[210] These were some of the
factors in leading to the revision not only of the diagnosis of schizophrenia,
but the revision of the whole DSM manual, resulting in the publication of the
DSM-III in 1980.[211] Since the 1970s more than 40 diagnostic criteria for
schizophrenia have been proposed and evaluated.[34]

In the Soviet Union the diagnosis of schizophrenia has also been used for
political purposes. The prominent Soviet psychiatrist Andrei Snezhnevsky
created and promoted an additional sub-classification of sluggishly
progressing schizophrenia. This diagnosis was used to discredit and
expeditiously imprison political dissidents while dispensing with a
potentially embarrassing trial.[212] The practice was exposed to Westerners by
a number of Soviet dissidents, and in 1977 the World Psychiatric Association
condemned the Soviet practice at the Sixth World Congress of Psychiatry.[213]
Rather than defending his theory that a latent form of schizophrenia caused
dissidents to oppose the regime, Snezhnevsky broke all contact with the West
in 1980 by resigning his honorary positions abroad.[214]

## Society and culture

### Stigma

Social stigma has been identified as a major obstacle in the recovery of
patients with schizophrenia.[215] In a large, representative sample from a
1999 study, 12.8% of Americans believed that individuals with schizophrenia
were "very likely" to do something violent against others, and 48.1% said that
they were "somewhat likely" to. Over 74% said that people with schizophrenia
were either "not very able" or "not able at all" to make decisions concerning
their treatment, and 70.2% said the same of money management decisions.[216]
The perception of individuals with psychosis as violent has more than doubled
in prevalence since the 1950s, according to one meta-analysis.[217]

In order to reduce stigma, in 2002 the Japanese Society of Psychiatry and
Neurology changed the term for schizophrenia from Seishin-Bunretsu-
Byoãç²¾ç¥åè£ç (mind-split-disease) to
TÅgÅ-shitchÅ-shÅãçµ±åå¤±èª¿ç (integration disorder). The new name
was inspired by the bio-psychosocial model, and it increased the percentage of
cases in which patients were informed of the diagnosis from 36.7% to 69.7%
over three years.[218]

### Iconic cultural depictions

The book and film A Beautiful Mind chronicled the life of John Forbes Nash, a
Nobel Prize-winning mathematician who was diagnosed with schizophrenia. The
Marathi film Devrai (featuring Atul Kulkarni) is a presentation of a patient
with schizophrenia. The film, set in the Konkan region of Maharashtra in
Western India, shows the behavior, mentality, and struggle of the patient as
well as his loved-ones. It also portrays the treatment of this mental illness
using medication, dedication and plenty of patience by the close relatives of
the patient. Other factual books have been written by relatives on family
members; Australian journalist Anne Deveson told the story of her son's battle
with schizophrenia in Tell me I'm Here,[219] later made into a movie.

In Bulgakov's The Master and Margarita the poet Ivan Bezdomnyj is
institutionalized and diagnosed with schizophrenia after witnessing the devil
(Woland) predict Berlioz's death. The book The Eden Express by Mark Vonnegut
recounts his struggle with schizophrenia and his recovering journey.

## References

  1. ^ a b Castle D, Wesseley S, Der G, Murray RM (1991). "The incidence of operationally defined schizophrenia in Camberwell 1965â84". British Journal of Psychiatry 159: 790â794. doi:10.1192/bjp.159.6.790. PMID 1790446. http://bjp.rcpsych.org/cgi/content/abstract/159/6/790. Retrieved on 2008-07-05.
  2. ^ Bhugra D (2006). "The global prevalence of schizophrenia". PLoS Medicine 2 (5): 372â373. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020151. PMID 15916460. http://medicine.plosjournals.org/perlserv/?request=get-document&doi=10.1371%2Fjournal.pmed.0020151. Retrieved on 2008-02-24.
  3. ^ a b Goldner EM, Hsu L, Waraich P, Somers JM (2002). "Prevalence and incidence studies of schizophrenic disorders: a systematic review of the literature". Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 47 (9): 833â43. PMID 12500753. http://ww1.cpa-apc.org:8080/publications/archives/CJP/2002/November/goldner.asp. Retrieved on 2008-07-05.
  4. ^ a b c d e American Psychiatric Association (2000). "Schizophrenia". Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-IV. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.. ISBN 0-89042-024-6.
  5. ^ Rathus, Spencer; Jeffrey Nevid (1991). Abnormal Psychology. Prentice Hall. p. 228\. ISBN 0130052167.
  6. ^ a b Becker T, Kilian R (2006). "Psychiatric services for people with severe mental illness across western Europe: what can be generalized from current knowledge about differences in provision, costs and outcomes of mental health care?". Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica Supplement 429: 9â16. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.2005.00711.x. PMID 16445476.
  7. ^ Sim K, Chua TH, Chan YH, Mahendran R, Chong SA (October 2006). "Psychiatric comorbidity in first episode schizophrenia: a 2 year, longitudinal outcome study". Journal of Psychiatric Research 40 (7): 656â63. doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2006.06.008. PMID 16904688. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0022-3956(06)00122-1. Retrieved on 2008-07-05.
  8. ^ a b Brown S, Barraclough B, Inskip H (2000). "Causes of the excess mortality of schizophrenia". British Journal of Psychiatry 177: 212â7. doi:10.1192/bjp.177.3.212. PMID 11040880.
  9. ^ Addington J; Cadenhead KS, Cannon TD, Cornblatt B, McGlashan TH, Perkins DO, Seidman LJ, Tsuang M, Walker EF, Woods SW, Heinssen R (2007). "North American prodrome longitudinal study: a collaborative multisite approach to prodromal schizophrenia research". Schizophrenia Bulletin 33 (3): 665â72. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbl075. PMID 17255119.
  10. ^ Parnas J; Jorgensen A (1989). "Pre-morbid psychopathology in schizophrenia spectrum". British Journal of Psychiatry 115: 623â7. PMID 2611591.
  11. ^ Amminger GP; Leicester S, Yung AR, Phillips LJ, Berger GE, Francey SM, Yuen HP, McGorry PD (2006). "Early-onset of symptoms predicts conversion to non-affective psychosis in ultra-high risk individuals". Schizophrenia Research 84 (1): 67â76. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2006.02.018. PMID 16677803.
  12. ^ Schneider, K. (1959) Clinical Psychopathology. New York: Grune and Stratton.
  13. ^ Nordgaard J, Arnfred SM, Handest P, Parnas J (January 2008). "The diagnostic status of first-rank symptoms". Schizophr Bull 34 (1): 137â54. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbm044. PMID 17562695. http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=17562695.
  14. ^ Sims A (2002). Symptoms in the mind: an introduction to descriptive psychopathology. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders. ISBN 0-7020-2627-1.
  15. ^ a b Cohen & Docherty (2004). "Affective reactivity of speech and emotional experience in patients with schizophrenia". Schizophrenia Research 69 (1): 7â14. doi:10.1016/S0920-9964(03)00069-0. PMID 15145465.
  16. ^ Peralta V; Cuesta MJ (2001). "How many and which are the psychopathological dimensions in schizophrenia? Issues influencing their ascertainment". Schizophrenia Research 49 (3): 269â85. doi:10.1016/S0920-9964(00)00071-2. PMID 11356588.
  17. ^ Manji, Hk; Gottesman, Ii; Gould, Td (Nov 2003). "Signal transduction and genes-to-behaviors pathways in psychiatric diseases.". Science's STKE: signal transduction knowledge environment 2003 (207): pe49. doi:10.1126/stke.2003.207.pe49. PMID 14600293.
  18. ^ Jakobsen KD; Frederiksen JN, Hansen T, Jansson LB, Parnas J, Werge T (2005). "Reliability of clinical ICD-10 schizophrenia diagnoses". Nordic Journal of Psychiatry 59 (3): 209â12. doi:10.1080/08039480510027698. PMID 16195122.
  19. ^ Pope HG (1983). "Distinguishing bipolar disorder from schizophrenia in clinical practice: guidelines and case reports" (PDF). Hospital and Community Psychiatry 34: 322â328. http://psychservices.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/reprint/34/4/322.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-02-24.
  20. ^ McGlashan TH (February 1987). "Testing DSM-III symptom criteria for schizotypal and borderline personality disorders". Archives of General Psychiatry 44 (2): 143â8. PMID 3813809.
  21. ^ Boyle, Mary (2002). Schizophrenia: a scientific delusion?. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-22718-6.
  22. ^ Bentall, Richard P.; Read, John E; Mosher, Loren R. (2004). Models of Madness: Psychological, Social and Biological Approaches to Schizophrenia. Philadelphia: Brunner-Routledge. ISBN 1-58391-906-6.
  23. ^ Schizophrenia term use 'invalid'. BBC News Online, (9 October 2006). Retrieved on 2007-05-16.
  24. ^ "CASL Biography". http://www.caslcampaign.com/aboutus_biography.php. Retrieved on 2009-02-01. and "CASL History". http://www.caslcampaign.com/aboutus.php. Retrieved on 2009-02-01.
  25. ^ a b Tsuang MT; Stone WS, Faraone SV (2000). "Toward reformulating the diagnosis of schizophrenia". American Journal of Psychiatry 157 (7): 1041â50. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.157.7.1041. PMID 10873908.
  26. ^ Verdoux H; van Os J (2002). "Psychotic symptoms in non-clinical populations and the continuum of psychosis". Schizophrenia Research 54 (1-2): 59â65. doi:10.1016/S0920-9964(01)00352-8. PMID 11853979.
  27. ^ Johns LC; van Os J (2001). "The continuity of psychotic experiences in the general population". Clinical Psychology Review 21 (8): 1125â41. doi:10.1016/S0272-7358(01)00103-9. PMID 11702510.
  28. ^ Peters ER; Day S, McKenna J, Orbach G (2005). "Measuring delusional ideation: the 21-item Peters et al. Delusions Inventory (PDI)". Schizophrenia Bulletin 30: 1005â22. PMID 15954204.
  29. ^ Edgar Jones (1999). "The Phenomenology of Abnormal Belief: A Philosophical and Psychiatric Inquiry". Philosophy, Psychiatry and Psychology 6 (1): 1â16. http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/philosophy_psychiatry_and_psychology/v006/6.1jones01.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-24.
  30. ^ David AS (1999). "On the impossibility of defining delusions". Philosophy, Psychiatry and Psychology 6 (1): 17â20. http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/philosophy_psychiatry_and_psychology/v006/6.1david.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-24.
  31. ^ S. Nassir Ghaemi (1999). "An Empirical Approach to Understanding Delusions". Philosophy, Psychiatry and Psychology 6 (1): 21â24. http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/philosophy_psychiatry_and_psychology/v006/6.1ghaemi.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-24.
  32. ^ Andreasen NC (March 2000). "Schizophrenia: the fundamental questions". Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 31 (2-3): 106â12. PMID 10719138. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0165017399000272.
  33. ^ Andreasen NC (September 1999). "A unitary model of schizophrenia: Bleuler's "fragmented phrene" as schizencephaly". Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 56 (9): 781â7. PMID 12884883. http://archpsyc.ama-assn.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=12884883.
  34. ^ a b c Jansson LB, Parnas J (September 2007). "Competing definitions of schizophrenia: what can be learned from polydiagnostic studies?". Schizophr Bull 33 (5): 1178â200. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbl065. PMID 17158508. http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=17158508.
  35. ^ Green MF, Nuechterlein KH (1999). "Should schizophrenia be treated as a neurocognitive disorder?". Schizophr Bull 25 (2): 309â19. PMID 10416733. http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=10416733.
  36. ^ Green, Michael (2001). Schizophrenia revealed: from neurons to social interactions. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 0-393-70334-7. Lay summary.
  37. ^ Lake CR, Hurwitz N (July 2007). "Schizoaffective disorder merges schizophrenia and bipolar disorders as one diseaseâthere is no schizoaffective disorder". Curr Opin Psychiatry 20 (4): 365â79. doi:10.1097/YCO.0b013e3281a305ab. PMID 17551352. http://meta.wkhealth.com/pt/pt-core/template-journal/lwwgateway/media/landingpage.htm?an=00001504-200707000-00011.
  38. ^ Malhi GS, Green M, Fagiolini A, Peselow ED, Kumari V (February 2008). "Schizoaffective disorder: diagnostic issues and future recommendations". Bipolar Disord 10 (1 Pt 2): 215â30. doi:10.1111/j.1399-5618.2007.00564.x. PMID 18199238. http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/resolve/openurl?genre=article&sid=nlm:pubmed&issn=1398-5647&date=2008&volume=10&issue=1%20Pt%202&spage=215.
  39. ^ Craddock N, Owen MJ (May 2005). "The beginning of the end for the Kraepelinian dichotomy". Br J Psychiatry 186: 364â6. doi:10.1192/bjp.186.5.364. PMID 15863738. http://bjp.rcpsych.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=15863738.
  40. ^ Kumra S; Shaw M, Merka P, Nakayama E, Augustin R (2001). "Childhood-onset schizophrenia: research update". Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 46 (10): 923â30. PMID 11816313.
  41. ^ Hassett A, Ames D, Chiu E (eds) (2005) Psychosis in the Elderly. London: Taylor and Francis. ISBN 18418439446
  42. ^ Jablensky A; Sartorius N, Ernberg G, Anker M, Korten A, Cooper JE, Day R, Bertelsen A (1992). "Schizophrenia: manifestations, incidence and course in different cultures. A World Health Organization ten-country study". Psychological Medicine Monograph Supplement 20: 1â97. PMID 1565705.
  43. ^ Kirkbride JB; Fearon P, Morgan C, Dazzan P, Morgan K, Tarrant J, Lloyd T, Holloway J, Hutchinson G, Leff JP, Mallett RM, Harrison GL, Murray RM, Jones PB (2006). "Heterogeneity in incidence rates of schizophrenia and other psychotic syndromes: findings From the 3-center ÃSOP study". Archives of General Psychiatry 63 (3): 250â58. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.63.3.250. PMID 16520429.
  44. ^ Kirkbride JB; Fearon P, Morgan C, Dazzan P, Morgan K, Murray RM, Jones PB (2007). "Neighbourhood variation in the incidence of psychotic disorders in Southeast London". Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 42 (6): 438â45. doi:10.1007/s00127-007-0193-0. PMID 17473901.
  45. ^ a b Van Os J (2004). "Does the urban environment cause psychosis?". British Journal of Psychiatry 184 (4): 287â288. doi:10.1192/bjp.184.4.287. PMID 15056569.
  46. ^ Ustun TB; Rehm J, Chatterji S, Saxena S, Trotter R, Room R, Bickenbach J, and the WHO/NIH Joint Project CAR Study Group (1999). "Multiple-informant ranking of the disabling effects of different health conditions in 14 countries". The Lancet 354 (9173): 111â15. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(98)07507-2. PMID 10408486.
  47. ^ ;Meyer-Lindenberg A; Miletich RS, Kohn PD, Esposito G, Carson RE, Quarantelli M, Weinberger DR, Berman KF (2002). "Reduced prefrontal activity predicts exaggerated striatal dopaminergic function in schizophrenia". Nature Neuroscience 5: 267â71. doi:10.1038/nn804. PMID 11865311.
  48. ^ Harrison PJ; Owen MJ (2003). "Genes for schizophrenia? Recent findings and their pathophysiological implications". The Lancet 361 (9355): 417â19. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(03)12379-3. PMID 12573388.
  49. ^ Day R; Nielsen JA, Korten A, Ernberg G, Dube KC, Gebhart J, Jablensky A, Leon C, Marsella A, Olatawura M, et al. (1987). "Stressful life events preceding the acute onset of schizophrenia: a cross-national study from the World Health Organization". Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry 11 (2): 123â205. doi:10.1007/BF00122563. PMID 3595169.
  50. ^ Corcoran C; Walker E, Huot R, Mittal V, Tessner K, Kestler L, Malaspina D (2003). "The stress cascade and schizophrenia: etiology and onset". Schizophrenia Bulletin 29 (4): 671â92. PMID 14989406.
  51. ^ O'Donovan MC; Williams NM, Owen MJ (2003). "Recent advances in the genetics of schizophrenia". Human Molecular Genetics 12 Spec No 2: R125â33. doi:10.1093/hmg/ddg302. PMID 12952866.
  52. ^ Owen MJ; Craddock N, O'Donovan MC (2005). "Schizophrenia: genes at last?". Trends in Genetics 21 (9): 518â25. doi:10.1016/j.tig.2005.06.011. PMID 16009449.
  53. ^ Craddock N; O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ (2006). "Genes for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder? Implications for psychiatric nosology". Schizophrenia Bulletin 32 (1): 9â16. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbj033. PMID 16319375.
  54. ^ Crow TJ (January 2007). "How and why genetic linkage has not solved the problem of psychosis: review and hypothesis". Am J Psychiatry 164 (1): 13â21. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.164.1.13. PMID 17202538. http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=17202538.
  55. ^ "A framework for interpreting genome-wide association studies of psychiatric disorders". Mol. Psychiatry 14 (1): 10â7. January 2009. doi:10.1038/mp.2008.126. PMID 19002139. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/mp.2008.126.
  56. ^ Walsh T, McClellan JM, McCarthy SE et al. (2008). "Rare structural variants disrupt multiple genes in neurodevelopmental pathways in schizophrenia". Science 320 (5875): 539â43. doi:10.1126/science.1155174. PMID 18369103.
  57. ^ Kirov G, Grozeva D, Norton N et al. (2009). "Support for the involvement of large CNVs in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia". Hum Mol Genet. doi:10.1093/hmg/ddp043. PMID 19181681.
  58. ^ Crow TJ (July 2008). "The 'big bang' theory of the origin of psychosis and the faculty of language". Schizophr. Res. 102 (1-3): 31â52. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2008.03.010. PMID 18502103. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0920-9964(08)00149-7.
  59. ^ Kim T. Mueser, Dilip V. Jeste (2008). Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia. p. 22â23. ISBN 1593856520.
  60. ^ Davies G; Welham J, Chant D, Torrey EF, McGrath J (2003). "A systematic review and meta-analysis of Northern Hemisphere season of birth studies in schizophrenia". Schizophrenia Bulletin 29 (3): 587â93. PMID 14609251.
  61. ^ Brown AS (2006). "Prenatal infection as a risk factor for schizophrenia". Schizophrenia Bulletin 32 (2): 200â2. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbj052. PMID 16469941.
  62. ^ van Os J, Krabbendam L, Myin-Germeys I, Delespaul P (March 2005). "The schizophrenia envirome". Current Opinion in Psychiatry 18 (2): 141â5. PMID 16639166. http://www.co-psychiatry.com/pt/re/copsych/abstract.00001504-200503000-00006.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-06.
  63. ^ Mueser KT, McGurk SR (2004). "Schizophrenia". The Lancet 363 (9426): 2063â72. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16458-1. PMID 15207959.
  64. ^ Selten JP, Cantor-Graae E, Kahn RS (March 2007). "Migration and schizophrenia". Current Opinion in Psychiatry 20 (2): 111â115. doi:10.1097/YCO.0b013e328017f68e. PMID 17278906. http://www.co-psychiatry.com/pt/re/copsych/abstract.00001504-200703000-00003.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-06.
  65. ^ Schenkel LS; Spaulding WD, Dilillo D, Silverstein SM (2005). "Histories of childhood maltreatment in schizophrenia: Relationships with premorbid functioning, symptomatology, and cognitive deficits". Schizophrenia Research 76 (2-3): 273â286. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2005.03.003. PMID 15949659.
  66. ^ Janssen; Krabbendam L, Bak M, Hanssen M, Vollebergh W, de Graaf R, van Os J (2004). "Childhood abuse as a risk factor for psychotic experiences". Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 109: 38â45. doi:10.1046/j.0001-690X.2003.00217.x. PMID 14674957.
  67. ^ a b Bentall RP; Fernyhough C, Morrison AP, Lewis S, Corcoran R (2007). "Prospects for a cognitive-developmental account of psychotic experiences". Br J Clin Psychol 46 (Pt 2): 155â73. doi:10.1348/014466506X123011. PMID 17524210.
  68. ^ Subotnik, KL; Goldstein, MJ, Nuechterlein, KH, Woo, SM and Mintz, J (2002). "Are Communication Deviance and Expressed Emotion Related to Family History of Psychiatric Disorders in Schizophrenia?". Schizophrenia Bulletin 28 (4): 719â29. PMID 12795501.
  69. ^ Ferdinand RF, Sondeijker F, van der Ende J, Selten JP, Huizink A, Verhulst FC (2005). "Cannabis use predicts future psychotic symptoms, and vice versa". Addiction 100 (5): 612â8. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2005.01070.x. PMID 15847618.
  70. ^ Moore THM, Zammit S, Lingford-Hughes A et al. (2007). "Cannabis use and risk of psychotic or affective mental health outcomes: a systematic review". Lancet 370 (9584): 319-328. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61162-3. PMID 17662880.
  71. ^ Gregg L, Barrowclough C, Haddock G (2007). "Reasons for increased substance use in psychosis". Clin Psychol Rev 27 (4): 494â510. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2006.09.004. PMID 17240501.
  72. ^ Broome MR; Woolley JB, Tabraham P, Johns LC, Bramon E, Murray GK, Pariante C, McGuire PK, Murray RM (2005). "What causes the onset of psychosis?". Schizophrenia Research 79 (1): 23â34. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2005.02.007. PMID 16198238.
  73. ^ Lewis R (2004). "Should cognitive deficit be a diagnostic criterion for schizophrenia?". Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience 29 (2): 102â113. PMID 15069464.
  74. ^ Brune M; Abdel-Hamid M, Lehmkamper C, Sonntag C (2007). "Mental state attribution, neurocognitive functioning, and psychopathology: What predicts poor social competence in schizophrenia best?". Schizophrenia Research 92 (1-2): 151â9. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2007.01.006. PMID 17346931.
  75. ^ Sitskoorn MM; Aleman A, Ebisch SJH, Appels MCM, Khan RS (2004). "Cognitive deficits in relatives of patients with schizophrenia: a meta-analysis". Schizophrenia Research 71 (2): 285â295. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2004.03.007. PMID 15474899.
  76. ^ Kurtz MM (2005). "Neurocognitive impairment across the lifespan in schizophrenia: an update". Schizophrenia Research 74 (1): 15â26. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2004.07.005. PMID 15694750.
  77. ^ Horan WP; Blanchard JJ (2003). "Emotional responses to psychosocial stress in schizophrenia: the role of individual differences in affective traits and coping". Schizophrenia Research 60 (2-3): 271â83. doi:10.1016/S0920-9964(02)00227-X. PMID 12591589.
  78. ^ Barrowclough C; Tarrier N, Humphreys L, Ward J, Gregg L, Andrews B (2003). "Self-esteem in schizophrenia: relationships between self-evaluation, family attitudes, and symptomatology". J Abnorm Psychol 112 (1): 92â9. doi:10.1037/0021-843X.112.1.92. PMID 12653417.
  79. ^ Birchwood M; Meaden A, Trower P, Gilbert P, Plaistow J (2000). "The power and omnipotence of voices: subordination and entrapment by voices and significant others". Psychol Med 30 (2): 337â44. doi:10.1017/S0033291799001828. PMID 10824654.
  80. ^ Smith B; Fowler DG, Freeman D, Bebbington P, Bashforth H, Garety P, Dunn G, Kuipers E (2006). "Emotion and psychosis: links between depression, self-esteem, negative schematic beliefs and delusions and hallucinations". Schizophrenia Research 86 (1-3): 181â8. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2006.06.018. PMID 16857346.
  81. ^ Beck, AT (2004). "A Cognitive Model of Schizophrenia". Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy 18 (3): 281â88. doi:10.1891/jcop.18.3.281.65649.
  82. ^ Bell V; Halligan PW, Ellis HD (2006). "Explaining delusions: a cognitive perspective". Trends in Cognitive Science 10 (5): 219â26. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2006.03.004. PMID 16600666.
  83. ^ Freeman D; Garety PA, Kuipers E, Fowler D, Bebbington PE, Dunn G (2007). "Acting on persecutory delusions: the importance of safety seeking". Behaviour Research and Therapy 45 (1): 89â99. doi:10.1016/j.brat.2006.01.014. PMID 16530161.
  84. ^ Kuipers E; Garety P, Fowler D, Freeman D, Dunn G, Bebbington P (2006). "Cognitive, emotional, and social processes in psychosis: refining cognitive behavioral therapy for persistent positive symptoms". Schizophrenia Bulletin 32 (Suppl 1): S24â31. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbl014. PMID 16885206.
  85. ^ Kircher, Tilo; Renate Thienel (2006). "Functional brain imaging of symptoms and cognition in schizophrenia". The Boundaries of Consciousness. p. 302\. ISBN 0444528768. http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=YHGacGKyVbYC&oi=fnd&pg=PA302&dq=%22frontal+lobes%22,+hippocampus,+%22temporal+lobes%22+schizophrenia+%22Positron+emission+tomography%22+%22Functional+magnetic+resonance+imaging%22+deficit&ots=STMQViatzX&sig=vGw3lm0wByKl8jbN82ix15nhOsc.
  86. ^ Green MF (2006). "Cognitive impairment and functional outcome in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder". Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 67 (Suppl 9): 3â8. PMID 16965182.
  87. ^ Laruelle M; Abi-Dargham A, van Dyck CH, Gil R, D'Souza CD, Erdos J, McCance E, Rosenblatt W, Fingado C, Zoghbi SS, Baldwin RM, Seibyl JP, Krystal JH, Charney DS, Innis RB (1996). "Single photon emission computerized tomography imaging of amphetamine-induced dopamine release in drug-free schizophrenic subjects". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 93: 9235â40. doi:10.1073/pnas.93.17.9235. PMID 8799184.
  88. ^ Jones HM; Pilowsky LS (2002). "Dopamine and antipsychotic drug action revisited". British Journal of Psychiatry 181: 271â275. doi:10.1192/bjp.181.4.271. PMID 12356650.
  89. ^ Konradi C; Heckers S (2003). "Molecular aspects of glutamate dysregulation: implications for schizophrenia and its treatment". Pharmacology and Therapeutics 97 (2): 153â79. doi:10.1016/S0163-7258(02)00328-5. PMID 12559388.
  90. ^ Lahti AC; Weiler MA, Tamara Michaelidis BA, Parwani A, Tamminga CA (2001). "Effects of ketamine in normal and schizophrenic volunteers". Neuropsychopharmacology 25 (4): 455â67. doi:10.1016/S0893-133X(01)00243-3. PMID 11557159.
  91. ^ Coyle JT; Tsai G, Goff D (2003). "Converging evidence of NMDA receptor hypofunction in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia". Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1003: 318â27. doi:10.1196/annals.1300.020. PMID 14684455.
  92. ^ Tuominen HJ; Tiihonen J, Wahlbeck K (2005). "Glutamatergic drugs for schizophrenia: a systematic review and meta-analysis". Schizophrenia Research 72: 225â34. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2004.05.005. PMID 15560967.
  93. ^ Steen RG, Mull C, McClure R, Hamer RM, Lieberman JA (June 2006). "Brain volume in first-episode schizophrenia: systematic review and meta-analysis of magnetic resonance imaging studies". Br J Psychiatry 188: 510â8. doi:10.1192/bjp.188.6.510. PMID 16738340. http://bjp.rcpsych.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=16738340.
  94. ^ Lieberman JA, Bymaster FP, Meltzer HY, Deutch AY, Duncan GE, Marx CE, Aprille JR, Dwyer DS, Li XM, Mahadik SP, Duman RS, Porter JH, Modica-Napolitano JS, Newton SS, Csernansky JG (September 2008). "Antipsychotic drugs: comparison in animal models of efficacy, neurotransmitter regulation, and neuroprotection". Pharmacol. Rev. 60 (3): 358â403. doi:10.1124/pr.107.00107. PMID 18922967. http://pharmrev.aspetjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=18922967.
  95. ^ DeLisi LE (March 2008). "The concept of progressive brain change in schizophrenia: implications for understanding schizophrenia". Schizophr Bull 34 (2): 312â21. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbm164. PMID 18263882. http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=18263882.
  96. ^ Ellison-Wright I, Bullmore E (March 2009). "Meta-analysis of diffusion tensor imaging studies in schizophrenia". Schizophr. Res. 108 (1-3): 3â10. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2008.11.021. PMID 19128945. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0920-9964(08)00527-6.
  97. ^ Broyd SJ, Demanuele C, Debener S, Helps SK, James CJ, Sonuga-Barke EJS (2008). "Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review". Neurosci Biobehav Rev. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2008.09.002. PMID 18824195.
  98. ^ van Os J, Burns T, Cavallaro R, et al (2006). Standardized remission criteria in schizophrenia. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 113(2), 91â5. PMID 16423159
  99. ^ Kay SR, Fiszbein A, Opler LA (1987). The positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13(2), 261â76. PMID 3616518
  100. ^ Turner T. (2007). "Unlocking psychosis". Brit J Med 334 (suppl): s7. doi:10.1136/bmj.39034.609074.94. PMID 17204765.
  101. ^ a b c Bellack AS. (2006) Scientific and consumer models of recovery in schizophrenia: concordance, contrasts, and implications. Schizophrenia Bulletin. Jul;32(3):432-42. PMID 16461575
  102. ^ McGurk, SR, Mueser KT, Feldman K, Wolfe R, Pascaris A (2007). Cognitive training for supported employment: 2â3 year outcomes of a randomized controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry. Mar;164(3):437â41. PMID 17329468
  103. ^ Kulhara P (1994). Outcome of schizophrenia: some transcultural observations with particular reference to developing countries. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 244(5), 227â35. PMID 7893767
  104. ^ Shankar Vedantam (2005) Social Network's Healing Power Is Borne Out in Poorer Nations Washington Post, June 27
  105. ^ National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health (2006-01-24). "Schizophrenia: Full national clinical guideline on core interventions in primary and secondary care" (PDF). Gaskell and the British Psychological Society. http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/pdf/cg001fullguideline.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  106. ^ Murphy BP, Chung YC, Park TW, McGorry PD (December 2006). "Pharmacological treatment of primary negative symptoms in schizophrenia: a systematic review". Schizophr. Res. 88 (1-3): 5â25. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2006.07.002. PMID 16930948. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0920-9964(06)00311-2.
  107. ^ Gray JA, Roth BL (October 2007). "The pipeline and future of drug development in schizophrenia". Mol. Psychiatry 12 (10): 904â22. doi:10.1038/sj.mp.4002062. PMID 17667958. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/sj.mp.4002062.
  108. ^ Jarskog LF, Miyamoto S, Lieberman JA (2007). "Schizophrenia: new pathological insights and therapies". Annu. Rev. Med. 58: 49â61. doi:10.1146/annurev.med.58.060904.084114. PMID 16903799. http://arjournals.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev.med.58.060904.084114?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%3dncbi.nlm.nih.gov.
  109. ^ Tandon R, Keshavan MS, Nasrallah HA (March 2008). "Schizophrenia, "Just the Facts": what we know in 2008 part 1: overview". Schizophr. Res. 100 (1-3): 4â19. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2008.01.022. PMID 18291627. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0920-9964(08)00071-6.
  110. ^ Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, et al (September 2005). "Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic schizophrenia". New England Journal of Medicine 353 (12): 1209â23. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa051688. PMID 16172203. http://content.nejm.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=short&pmid=16172203&promo=ONFLNS19. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  111. ^ Dickson RA, Dalby JT, Williams R, Edwards AL (July 1995). "Risperidone-induced prolactin elevations in premenopausal women with schizophrenia". American Journal of Psychiatry 152 (7): 1102â03. PMID 7540803.
  112. ^ Ananth J, Parameswaran S, Gunatilake S, Burgoyne K, Sidhom T (April 2004). "Neuroleptic malignant syndrome and atypical antipsychotic drugs". Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 65 (4): 464â70. PMID 15119907. http://article.psychiatrist.com/?ContentType=START&ID=10000823. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  113. ^ Leucht S, Wahlbeck K, Hamann J, Kissling W (May 2003). "New generation antipsychotics versus low-potency conventional antipsychotics: a systematic review and meta-analysis". Lancet 361 (9369): 1581â89. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(03)13306-5. PMID 12747876. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0140-6736(03)13306-5. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  114. ^ Meltzer HY (1997). "Treatment-resistant schizophreniaâthe role of clozapine". Current Medical Research and Opinion 14 (1): 1â20. PMID 9524789.
  115. ^ Wahlbeck K, Cheine MV, Essali A (2007). "Clozapine versus typical neuroleptic medication for schizophrenia". The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (John Wiley and Sons, Ltd.) (2): CD000059. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000059. ISSN 1464-780X. PMID 10796289.
  116. ^ Haas SJ, Hill R, Krum H (2007). "Clozapine-associated myocarditis: a review of 116 cases of suspected myocarditis associated with the use of clozapine in Australia during 1993â2003". Drug Safety 30: 47â57. doi:10.2165/00002018-200730010-00005. PMID 17194170.
  117. ^ Lee M, Dickson RA, Campbell M, Oliphant J, Gretton H, Dalby JT. (1998). "Clozapine and substance abuse in patients with schizophrenia". Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 43: 855â856.
  118. ^ Harrow M, Jobe TH (May 2007). "Factors involved in outcome and recovery in schizophrenia patients not on antipsychotic medications: a 15-year multifollow-up study". Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 195 (5): 406â414. PMID 17502806.
  119. ^ Emsley R, Oosthuizen P, van Rensburg SJ (2003). "Clinical potential of omega-3 fatty acids in the treatment of schizophrenia". CNS Drugs 17 (15): 1081â91. PMID 14661986.
  120. ^ Freeman MP, Hibbeln JR, Wisner KL, Davis JM, Mischoulon D, Peet M, Keck PE, Marangell LB, Richardson AJ, Lake J, Stoll AL (2006). "Omega-3 fatty acids: evidence basis for treatment and future research in psychiatry". Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 67 (12): 1954â67. PMID 17194275.
  121. ^ Ross BM, Seguin J, Sieswerda LE (2007). "Omega-3 fatty acids as treatments for mental illness: which disorder and which fatty acid?". Lipids Health Dis 6: 21. doi:10.1186/1476-511X-6-21. PMID 17877810. PMC: 2071911. http://www.lipidworld.com/content/6//21.
  122. ^ Moran, M (2005). Psychosocial Treatment Often Missing From Schizophrenia Regimens. Psychiatr News November 18, 2005, Volume 40, Number 22, page 24. Retrieved on 2007-05-17.
  123. ^ Cormac I, Jones C, Campbell C (2002). "Cognitive behaviour therapy for schizophrenia". Cochrane Database of systematic reviews (1): CD000524. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000524. PMID 11869579.
  124. ^ Wykes T, Steel C, Everitt B, Tarrier N (May 2008). "Cognitive behavior therapy for schizophrenia: effect sizes, clinical models, and methodological rigor". Schizophr Bull 34 (3): 523â37. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbm114. PMID 17962231.
  125. ^ Zimmermann G, Favrod J, Trieu VH, Pomini V (September 2005). "The effect of cognitive behavioral treatment on the positive symptoms of schizophrenia spectrum disorders: a meta-analysis". Schizophrenia Research 77 (1): 1â9. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2005.02.018. PMID 16005380. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0920-9964(05)00084-8. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  126. ^ Wykes T, Brammer M, Mellers J, et al (August 2002). "Effects on the brain of a psychological treatment: cognitive remediation therapy: functional magnetic resonance imaging in schizophrenia". British Journal of Psychiatry 181: 144â52. PMID 12151286. http://bjp.rcpsych.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=12151286. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  127. ^ Hogarty GE, Flesher S, Ulrich R, et al (September 2004). "Cognitive enhancement therapy for schizophrenia: effects of a 2-year randomized trial on cognition and behavior". Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 61 (9): 866â76. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.61.9.866. PMID 15351765. http://archpsyc.ama-assn.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=15351765. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  128. ^ McFarlane WR, Dixon L, Lukens E, Lucksted A (April 2003). "Family psychoeducation and schizophrenia: a review of the literature". J Marital Fam Ther 29 (2): 223â45. doi:10.1111/j.1752-0606.2003.tb01202.x. PMID 12728780.
  129. ^ Glynn SM, Cohen AN, Niv N (January 2007). "New challenges in family interventions for schizophrenia". Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics 7 (1): 33â43. doi:10.1586/14737175.7.1.33. PMID 17187495. http://www.future-drugs.com/doi/abs/10.1586/14737175.7.1.33?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%3dncbi.nlm.nih.gov. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  130. ^ Pharoah F, Mari J, Rathbone J, Wong W. (2006) Family intervention for schizophrenia Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 4
  131. ^ Jones S, Hayward P (2004). Coping with Schizophrenia: A Guide for Patients, Families and Caregivers. Oxford, England: Oneworld Pub.. ISBN 1-85168-344-5.
  132. ^ Torrey EF (2006). Surviving Schizophrenia: A Manual for Families, Consumers, and Providers (5th Edition ed.). HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-084259-8.
  133. ^ Kopelowicz A, Liberman RP, Zarate R (October 2006). "Recent advances in social skills training for schizophrenia". Schizophrenia Bulletin 32 Suppl 1: S12â23. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbl023. PMID 16885207. http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=16885207. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  134. ^ American Psychiatric Association (2004) Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients With Schizophrenia. Second Edition.
  135. ^ Talwar N, Crawford MJ, Maratos A, Nur U, McDermott O, Procter S (November 2006). "Music therapy for in-patients with schizophrenia: exploratory randomised controlled trial". The British Journal of Psychiatry 189: 405â9. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.105.015073. PMID 17077429. http://bjp.rcpsych.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=17077429. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  136. ^ Ruddy R, Milnes D. (2005) Art therapy for schizophrenia or schizophrenia-like illnesses. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 4
  137. ^ Ruddy RA, Dent-Brown K. (2007) Drama therapy for schizophrenia or schizophrenia-like illnesses. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 1.
  138. ^ Mosher LR (March 1999). "Soteria and other alternatives to acute psychiatric hospitalization: a personal and professional review". Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 187 (3): 142â9. doi:10.1097/00005053-199903000-00003. PMID 10086470. http://meta.wkhealth.com/pt/pt-core/template-journal/lwwgateway/media/landingpage.htm?issn=0022-3018&volume=187&issue=3&spage=142. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  139. ^ Calton T, Ferriter M, Huband N, Spandler H (January 2008). "A systematic review of the Soteria paradigm for the treatment of people diagnosed with schizophrenia". Schizophrenia Bulletin 34 (1): 181â92. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbm047. PMID 17573357. http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=17573357. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  140. ^ Greenhalgh J, Knight C, Hind D, Beverley C, Walters S (March 2005). "(abstract) Clinical and cost-effectiveness of electroconvulsive therapy for depressive illness, schizophrenia, catatonia and mania: systematic reviews and economic modelling studies". Health Technol Assess. 9 (9): 1â156. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15774232 (abstract). Retrieved on 2007-06-17.
  141. ^ "The clinical effectiveness and cost effectiveness of electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) for depressive illness, schizophrenia, catatonia and mania.". National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. April 2003. http://www.nice.org.uk/page.aspx?o=TA059. Retrieved on 2007-06-17.
  142. ^ Mashour GA, Walker EE, Martuza RL (June 2005). "Psychosurgery: past, present, and future". Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 48 (3): 409â19. doi:10.1016/j.brainresrev.2004.09.002. PMID 15914249. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0165-0173(04)00129-8. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  143. ^ Goering P, Durbin J, Sheldon CT, Ochocka J, Nelson G, Krupa T (July 2006). "Who uses consumer-run self-help organizations?". American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 76 (3): 367â73. doi:10.1037/0002-9432.76.3.367. PMID 16981815. http://content.apa.org/journals/ort/76/3/367. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  144. ^ Harrison G, Hopper K, Craig T, et al (June 2001). "Recovery from psychotic illness: a 15- and 25-year international follow-up study". British Journal of Psychiatry 178: 506â17. doi:10.1192/bjp.178.6.506. PMID 11388966. http://bjp.rcpsych.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=11388966. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  145. ^ a b Jobe TH, Harrow M (December 2005). "Long-term outcome of patients with schizophrenia: a review" (PDF). Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 50 (14): 892â900. PMID 16494258. http://ww1.cpa-apc.org:8080/Publications/Archives/CJP/2005/december/cjp-dec-05-Harrow-IR.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-07-05.
  146. ^ Robinson DG, Woerner MG, McMeniman M, Mendelowitz A, Bilder RM (March 2004). "Symptomatic and functional recovery from a first episode of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder". American Journal of Psychiatry 161 (3): 473â9. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.161.3.473. PMID 14992973. http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=14992973. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  147. ^ Harvey CA, Jeffreys SE, McNaught AS, Blizard RA, King MB (2007). "The Camden Schizophrenia Surveys III: Five-Year Outcome of a Sample of Individuals From a Prevalence Survey and the Importance of Social Relationships". International Journal of Social Psychiatry 53 (4): 340â356. doi:10.1177/0020764006074529. http://isp.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/53/4/340. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  148. ^ Hopper K, Wanderling J (2000). "Revisiting the developed versus developing country distinction in course and outcome in schizophrenia: results from ISoS, the WHO collaborative followup project. International Study of Schizophrenia". Schizophrenia Bulletin 26 (4): 835â46. PMID 11087016. http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=11087016. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  149. ^ Andreasen NC, Carpenter WT, Kane JM, Lasser RA, Marder SR, Weinberger DR (March 2005). "Remission in schizophrenia: proposed criteria and rationale for consensus". The American Journal of Psychiatry 162 (3): 441â9. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.162.3.441. PMID 15741458. http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=15741458. Retrieved on 2008-07-07.
  150. ^ Liberman RP, Kopelowicz A (June 2005). "Recovery From Schizophrenia: A Concept in Search of Research". Psychiatric Services 56 (6): 735â742. doi:10.1176/appi.ps.56.6.735. PMID 15939952. http://psychservices.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/content/full/56/6/735. Retrieved on 2008-07-07.
  151. ^ Davidson L, Schmutte T, Dinzeo T, Andres-Hyman R (January 2008). "Remission and recovery in schizophrenia: practitioner and patient perspectives". Schizophrenia Bulletin 34 (1): 5â8. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbm122. PMID 17984297. http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=17984297. Retrieved on 2008-07-07.
  152. ^ Davidson L, McGlashan TH (February 1997). "The varied outcomes of schizophrenia". Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 42 (1): 34â43. PMID 9040921.
  153. ^ Lieberman JA, Koreen AR, Chakos M, et al (1996). "Factors influencing treatment response and outcome of first-episode schizophrenia: implications for understanding the pathophysiology of schizophrenia". Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 57 Suppl 9: 5â9. PMID 8823344.
  154. ^ Bebbington P, Kuipers L (August 1994). "The predictive utility of expressed emotion in schizophrenia: an aggregate analysis". Psychological Medicine 24 (3): 707â18. PMID 7991753.
  155. ^ Hannerz H, BorgÃ¥ P, Borritz M (September 2001). "Life expectancies for individuals with psychiatric diagnoses". Public Health 115 (5): 328â37. doi:10.1038/sj.ph.1900785. PMID 11593442.
  156. ^ Palmer BA, Pankratz VS, Bostwick JM. (2005) The lifetime risk of suicide in schizophrenia: a reexamination. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2005 Mar;62(3):247-53. PMID 15753237
  157. ^ Radomsky ED, Haas GL, Mann JJ, Sweeney JA (October 1999). "Suicidal behavior in patients with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders". American Journal of Psychiatry 156 (10): 1590â5. PMID 10518171. http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=10518171. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  158. ^ Caldwell CB, Gottesman II (1990). "Schizophrenics kill themselves too: a review of risk factors for suicide". Schizophr Bull 16 (4): 571â89. PMID 2077636.
  159. ^ Dalby JT, Williams RJ (1989). Depression in schizophrenics. New York: Plenum Press. ISBN 0-306-43240-4.
  160. ^ Violence and schizophrenia: 
    * Walsh E, Buchanan A, Fahy T (June 2002). "Violence and schizophrenia: examining the evidence". British Journal of Psychiatry 180: 490â5. doi:10.1192/bjp.180.6.490. PMID 12042226. http://bjp.rcpsych.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=12042226. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
    * Stuart H (June 2003). "Violence and mental illness: an overview". World Psychiatry 2 (2): 121â24. PMID 16946914.
    * Steadman HJ, Mulvey EP, Monahan J, et al (May 1998). "Violence by people discharged from acute psychiatric inpatient facilities and by others in the same neighborhoods". Archives of General Psychiatry 55 (5): 393â401. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.55.5.393. PMID 9596041. http://archpsyc.ama-assn.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=9596041. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
    * Swanson JW, Swartz MS, Van Dorn RA, et al (May 2006). "A national study of violent behavior in persons with schizophrenia". Archives of General Psychiatry 63 (5): 490â9. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.63.5.490. PMID 16651506. http://archpsyc.ama-assn.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=16651506. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
    * Swanson JW, Holzer CE, Ganju VK, Jono RT (July 1990). "Violence and psychiatric disorder in the community: evidence from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area surveys". Hospital and Community Psychiatry 41 (7): 761â70. PMID 2142118. http://ps.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=2142118. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  161. ^ a b Mullen PE (2006). "Schizophrenia and violence: from correlations to preventive strategies". Advances in Psychiatric Treatment 12: 239â248. doi:10.1192/apt.12.4.239. http://apt.rcpsych.org/cgi/content/abstract/12/4/239. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  162. ^ Simpson AI, McKenna B, Moskowitz A, Skipworth J, Barry-Walsh J (November 2004). "Homicide and mental illness in New Zealand, 1970-2000". British Journal of Psychiatry 185: 394â8. doi:10.1192/bjp.185.5.394. PMID 15516547. http://bjp.rcpsych.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=15516547. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  163. ^ Fazel S, Grann M (November 2004). "Psychiatric morbidity among homicide offenders: a Swedish population study". American Journal of Psychiatry 161 (11): 2129â31. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.161.11.2129. PMID 15514419. http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=15514419. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  164. ^ Brekke JS, Prindle C, Bae SW, Long JD (October 2001). "Risks for individuals with schizophrenia who are living in the community". Psychiatr Serv 52 (10): 1358â66. PMID 11585953. http://ps.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=11585953. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  165. ^ Fitzgerald PB, de Castella AR, Filia KM, Filia SL, Benitez J, Kulkarni J (March 2005). "Victimization of patients with schizophrenia and related disorders". Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry 39 (3): 169â74. doi:10.1111/j.1440-1614.2005.01539.x. PMID 15701066. http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/openurl?genre=article&sid=nlm:pubmed&issn=0004-8674&date=2005&volume=39&issue=3&spage=169. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  166. ^ Walsh E, Gilvarry C, Samele C, et al (April 2004). "Predicting violence in schizophrenia: a prospective study". Schizophrenia Research 67 (2-3): 247â52. doi:10.1016/S0920-9964(03)00091-4. PMID 14984884. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0920996403000914. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  167. ^ Solomon PL, Cavanaugh MM, Gelles RJ (January 2005). "Family violence among adults with severe mental illness: a neglected area of research". Trauma Violence Abuse 6 (1): 40â54. doi:10.1177/1524838004272464. PMID 15574672. http://tva.sagepub.com/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=15574672. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  168. ^ Chou KR, Lu RB, Chang M (December 2001). "Assaultive behavior by psychiatric in-patients and its related factors". J Nurs Res 9 (5): 139â51. PMID 11779087.
  169. ^ LÃ¶gdberg B, Nilsson LL, Levander MT, Levander S (August 2004). "Schizophrenia, neighbourhood, and crime". Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 110 (2): 92â7. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0047.2004.00322.x. PMID 15233709. http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/openurl?genre=article&sid=nlm:pubmed&issn=0001-690X&date=2004&volume=110&issue=2&spage=92. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  170. ^ Cannon TD, Cornblatt B, McGorry P (May 2007). "The empirical status of the ultra high-risk (prodromal) research paradigm". Schizophrenia Bulletin 33 (3): 661â4. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbm031. PMID 17470445. http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=17470445. Retrieved on 2008-07-06.
  171. ^ Drake RJ, Lewis SW (March 2005). "Early detection of schizophrenia". Current Opinion in Psychiatry 18 (2): 147â50. doi:10.1097/00001504-200503000-00007. PMID 16639167. http://www.co-psychiatry.com/pt/re/copsych/abstract.00001504-200503000-00007.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-06.
  172. ^ Van Os J, Delespaul P (2005). "Toward a world consensus on prevention of schizophrenia". Dialogues Clin Neurosci 7 (1): 53â67. PMID 16060596.
  173. ^ McGorry, P.D., Yung, A., Phillips, L (2001). Ethics and early intervention in psychosis: keeping up the pace and staying in step. Schizophrenia Research, 51,(1), p17-29
  174. ^ Haroun N, Dunn L, Haroun A, Cadenhead KS (January 2006). "Risk and protection in prodromal schizophrenia: ethical implications for clinical practice and future research". Schizophrenia Bulletin 32 (1): 166â78. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbj007. PMID 16207892. http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=16207892. Retrieved on 2008-07-06.
  175. ^ HÃ¤fner H, Maurer K, Ruhrmann S, et al (April 2004). "Early detection and secondary prevention of psychosis: facts and visions". European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience 254 (2): 117â28. doi:10.1007/s00406-004-0508-z. PMID 15146341.
  176. ^ Cooper, David A. (1969). The Dialectics of Liberation (Pelican). London, England: Penguin Books Ltd. ISBN 0-14-021029-6.
  177. ^ Szasz, Thomas Stephen (1974). The myth of mental illness: foundations of a theory of personal conduct. San Francisco: Harper & Row. ISBN 0-06-091151-4.
  178. ^ R.D. Laing's and Aaron Esterson. Sanity, Madness and the Family (1964)
  179. ^ Bateson G, Jackson DD, Haley J, Weakland JH (1956). "Toward a theory of schizophrenia". Behavioral Science 1: 251â264.
  180. ^ Jaynes J (1976). The origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the bicameral mind. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-395-20729-0.
  181. ^ Polimeni J, Reiss JP (March 2002). "How shamanism and group selection may reveal the origins of schizophrenia". Med. Hypotheses 58 (3): 244â8. doi:10.1054/mehy.2001.1504. PMID 12018978. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S030698770191504X. Retrieved on 2008-07-07.
  182. ^ DeMause L (2002). "The seven stages of historical personality". Emotional Life of Nations. Other Press (NY). ISBN 1-892746-98-0.
  183. ^ Kurtz P (1991). The transcendental temptation: a critique of religion and the paranormal. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books. ISBN 0-87975-645-4.
  184. ^ Crow TJ (August 1997). "Schizophrenia as failure of hemispheric dominance for language". Trends Neurosci. 20 (8): 339â43. doi:10.1016/S0166-2236(97)01071-0. PMID 9246721. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0166223697010710. Retrieved on 2008-07-07.
  185. ^ Colin R (2004). Schizophrenia: Innovations in Diagnosis and Treatment. Haworth Press. ISBN 0789022699.
  186. ^ Sass LA, Parnas J (2003). "Schizophrenia, consciousness, and the self". Schizophr Bull 29 (3): 427â44. PMID 14609238. http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=14609238.
  187. ^ Lysaker PH, Lysaker JT (September 2008). "Schizophrenia and Alterations in Self-experience: A Comparison of 6 Perspectives". Schizophr Bull. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbn077. PMID 18635676. http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/sbn077v3.
  188. ^ Pfeiffer, Carl C.. Nutrition and Mental Illness: An Orthomolecular Approach to Balancing Body Chemistry. Healing Art Press. ISBN 0-89281-226-5.
  189. ^ Walker M, Hoffer A (1978). Orthomolecular nutrition: new lifestyle for super good health. Los Angeles: Keats Publishing. ISBN 0-87983-154-5.
  190. ^ Three studies by Dohan: 
    * Dohan FC (April 1970). "Coeliac disease and schizophrenia". Lancet 1 (7652): 897â8. PMID 4191543.
    * Dohan FC (July 1973). "Coeliac disease and schizophrenia". Br Med J 3 (5870): 51â2. PMID 4740433.
    * Dohan FC (May 1979). "Celiac-type diets in schizophrenia". Am J Psychiatry 136 (5): 732â3. PMID 434265.
  191. ^ Kalaydjian AE, Eaton W, Cascella N, Fasano A (February 2006). "The gluten connection: the association between schizophrenia and celiac disease". Acta Psychiatr Scand 113 (2): 82â90. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.2005.00687.x. PMID 16423158. http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/openurl?genre=article&sid=nlm:pubmed&issn=0001-690X&date=2006&volume=113&issue=2&spage=82. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  192. ^ Peleg R, Ben-Zion ZI, Peleg A, et al (August 2004). ""Bread madness" revisited: screening for specific celiac antibodies among schizophrenia patients". European Psychiatry 19 (5): 311â4. doi:10.1016/j.eurpsy.2004.06.003. PMID 15276666. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0924933804001348. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  193. ^ Lakhan SE, Vieira KF (2008). "Nutritional therapies for mental disorders". Nutr J 7: 2. doi:10.1186/1475-2891-7-2. PMID 18208598.
  194. ^ a b c Heinrichs RW (2003). "Historical origins of schizophrenia: two early madmen and their illness". J Hist Behav Sci 39 (4): 349â63. doi:10.1002/jhbs.10152. PMID 14601041.
  195. ^ Okasha, A., Okasha, T. (2000) Notes on mental disorders in Pharaonic Egypt History of Psychiatry, 11: 413-424
  196. ^ Nasser, M. (1987) Psychiatry in Ancient Egypt Bulletin Of The Royal College Of Psychiatrists, Vol 11, December.
  197. ^ Evans K, McGrath J, Milns R (May 2003). "Searching for schizophrenia in ancient Greek and Roman literature: a systematic review". Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 107 (5): 323â30. PMID 12752027. http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/118826875/abstract. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  198. ^ Youssef HA, Youssef FA, Dening TR (March 1996). "Evidence for the existence of schizophrenia in medieval Islamic society". History of Psychiatry 7 (25): 55â62. PMID 11609215. http://hpy.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/7/25/055. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  199. ^ Higgins ES, Kose S (July 2007). "Absence of schizophrenia in a 15th-century Islamic medical textbook". Am J Psychiatry 164 (7): 1120; author reply 1120â1. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.164.7.1120. PMID 17606667. http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=17606667.
  200. ^ Kraepelin E. (1907) Text book of psychiatry (7th ed) (trans. A.R. Diefendorf). London: Macmillan.
  201. ^ Hansen RA, Atchison B (2000). Conditions in occupational therapy: effect on occupational performance. Hagerstown, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. ISBN 0-683-30417-8.
  202. ^ McConaghey, J.C. (1905) Adolescent Insanity: A Protest against the Use of the Term "Dementia PrÃ¦cox" Journal of Mental Science (1905) 51: 340-348.
  203. ^ Kuhn R; tr. Cahn CH (2004). "Eugen Bleuler's concepts of psychopathology". Hist Psychiatry 15 (3): 361â6. doi:10.1177/0957154X04044603. PMID 15386868.
  204. ^ Stotz-Ingenlath G (2000). "Epistemological aspects of Eugen Bleuler's conception of schizophrenia in 1911" (PDF). Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy 3 (2): 153â9. doi:10.1023/A:1009919309015. PMID 11079343. http://www.kluweronline.com/art.pdf?issn=1386-7423&volume=3&page=153. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  205. ^ Porter, Roy; Berrios, G. E. (1995). A history of clinical psychiatry: the origin and history of psychiatric disorders. London: Athlone Press. ISBN 0-485-24211-7.
  206. ^ Allen GE (1997). "The social and economic origins of genetic determinism: a case history of the American Eugenics Movement, 1900-1940 and its lessons for today" (PDF). Genetica 99 (2-3): 77â88. doi:10.1007/BF02259511. PMID 9463076. http://www.kluweronline.com/art.pdf?issn=0016-6707&volume=99&page=77. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  207. ^ Bentall RP, Read JE, Mosher LR (2004). Models of Madness: Psychological, Social and Biological Approaches to Schizophrenia. Philadelphia: Brunner-Routledge. ISBN 1-58391-906-6.
  208. ^ Lifton, Robert Jay (1986). The Nazi doctors: medical killing and the psychology of genocide. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-04905-2.
  209. ^ Wing JK (January 1971). "International comparisons in the study of the functional psychoses". British Medical Bulletin 27 (1): 77â81. PMID 4926366.
  210. ^ Rosenhan D (1973). "On being sane in insane places". Science 179: 250â8. doi:10.1126/science.179.4070.250. PMID 4683124.
  211. ^ Wilson M (March 1993). "DSM-III and the transformation of American psychiatry: a history". American Journal of Psychiatry 150 (3): 399â410. PMID 8434655. http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=8434655. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  212. ^ Wilkinson G (1986). "Political dissent and "sluggish" schizophrenia in the Soviet Union". Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 293 (6548): 641â2. PMID 3092963.
  213. ^ Censuring The Soviets, TIME, September 12, 1977
  214. ^ Sidney Levine, The Special Committee on the Political Abuse of Psychiatry, Psychiatr. Bull., May 1981; 5: 94 - 95
  215. ^ McGorry, Patrick (2003). "The Influence of Stigma on Preventive Efforts in Psychotic Disorders," in Schizophrenia (WPA Series in Evidence & Experience in Psychiatry), p. 292.
  216. ^ Pescosolido BA, Monahan J, Link BG, Stueve A, Kikuzawa S (September 1999). "The public's view of the competence, dangerousness, and need for legal coercion of persons with mental health problems". Am J Public Health 89 (9): 1339â45. PMID 10474550. PMC: 1508769. http://www.ajph.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=10474550. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  217. ^ Phelan JC, Link BG, Stueve A, Pescosolido BA (June 2000). "Public Conceptions of Mental Illness in 1950 and 1996: What Is Mental Illness and Is It to be Feared?". Journal of Health and Social Behavior 41 (2): 188â207. doi:10.2307/2676305.
  218. ^ Sato M (2004). "Renaming schizophrenia: a Japanese perspective". World Psychiatry 5 (1): 53â5. PMID 16757998.
  219. ^ Deveson A (1991). Tell Me I'm Here. Penguin. ISBN 0-14-027257-7.

## Further reading

  * Bentall, Richard (2003). Madness explained: psychosis and human nature. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 0-7139-9249-2.
  * Dalby, J. Thomas (1996). Mental disease in history: a selection of translated readings. Bern: Peter Lang. ISBN 0-8204-3056-0.
  * Fallon, James H. (2003). "The Neuroanatomy of Schizophrenia: Circuitry and Neurotransmitter Systems". Clinical Neuroscience Research 3: 77â107. doi:10.1016/S1566-2772(03)00022-7.
  * Fleck, Stephen; Theodore Lidz and Alice Cornelison (1985). Schizophrenia and the family. New York: International Universities Press. ISBN 0-8236-6001-X.
  * Keen TM (December 1999). "Schizophrenia: orthodoxy and heresies. A review of alternative possibilities". Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing 6 (6): 415â24. PMID 10818864. http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/openurl?genre=article&sid=nlm:pubmed&issn=1351-0126&date=1999&volume=6&issue=6&spage=415. Retrieved on 2008-07-07.
  * Laing, Ronald D. (1990). The divided self: an existential study in sanity and madness. New York: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-013537-5.
  * Noll, Richard (2006). The Encyclopedia of Schizophrenia And Other Psychotic Disorders (Facts on File Library of Health and Living). New York: Facts on File. ISBN 0-8160-6405-9.
  * Roazen, Paul; Victor Tausk (1991). Sexuality, war, and schizophrenia: collected psychoanalytic papers. New Brunswick, N.J., U.S.A: Transaction Publishers. ISBN 0-88738-365-3. (On the Origin of the 'Influencing Machine' in Schizophrenia.)
  * Shaner A, Miller G, Mintz J (September 2004). "Schizophrenia as one extreme of a sexually selected fitness indicator" (PDF). Schizophr. Res. 70 (1): 101â9. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2003.09.014. PMID 15246469. http://www.unm.edu/~gfmiller/new_papers/shaner%20miller%202004%20schizo.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-07-07.
  * Szasz, Thomas Stephen (1976). Schizophrenia: the sacred symbol of psychiatry. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-07222-4.

## External links

  * Schizophrenia at the Open Directory Project
  * NPR: the sight and sounds of schizophrenia
  * The current World Health Organisation definition of Schizophrenia
  * Symptoms in Schizophrenia Film made in 1940 showing some of the symptoms of Schizophrenia.
  * Schizophrenics call to Church for understanding, Western Catholic Reporter
  * World Fellowship for Schizophrenia and Allied Disorders 'Information for families caring for people with mental illness'
  * Schizophrenia: Medical students are taught it's all in the genes, but are they hearing the whole story? Leo, J. Ph.D., & J. Joseph, Psy. D.

Featured article

v â¢ d â¢ e

WHO ICD-10 mental and behavioral disorders (F Â· 290â319)  
Neurological/symptomatic

Dementia (Alzheimer's disease, multi-infarct dementia, Pick's disease,
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease, AIDS
dementia complex, Frontotemporal dementia, Elopement, Sundowning, Wandering)
Â· Delirium Â· Post-concussion syndrome Â· Organic brain syndrome  
Psychoactive substance

alcohol (acute alcohol intoxication, drunkenness, alcohol dependence,
alcoholic hallucinosis, Alcohol withdrawal, delirium tremens, Korsakoff's
syndrome, alcohol abuse) Â· opioids (opioid overdose, opioid dependency) Â·
sedative/hypnotic (benzodiazepine overdose, benzodiazepine dependence,
benzodiazepine withdrawal) Â· cocaine (cocaine dependence) Â· general
(Intoxication/Drug overdose, Drug abuse, Physical dependence, Rebound effect,
Withdrawal)  
Schizophrenia, schizotypal  
and delusional

Psychosis (Schizoaffective disorder, Schizophreniform disorder, Brief reactive
psychosis) Â· Schizophrenia (Disorganized schizophrenia, Delusional disorder,
Folie Ã deux) Â· Personality disorder (Schizotypal personality disorder)  
Mood (affective)

Mania Â· Bipolar disorder (Bipolar I, Bipolar II, Cyclothymia) Â· Depression
(Major depressive disorder, Dysthymia)  
Neurotic, stress-related  
and somatoform

Anxiety disorder/  
adjustment disorder

phobic anxiety disorders: Agoraphobia Â· Social anxiety/Social phobia
(Anthropophobia) Â· Specific phobia (Claustrophobia)  
Panic disorder/Panic attack Â· Generalized anxiety disorder Â· OCD Â· stress
(Acute stress reaction, PTSD)  
Somatoform disorder

Somatization disorder Â· Body dysmorphic disorder Â· Hypochondriasis Â·
Nosophobia Â· Da Costa's syndrome Â· Psychalgia Â· Conversion disorder (Ganser
syndrome) Â· Neurasthenia  
Dissociative disorder

Dissociative identity disorder Â· Psychogenic amnesia  
Physiological/physical  
behavioral

Eating disorder

Anorexia nervosa Â· Bulimia nervosa  
Sleep disorder

Dyssomnia (Hypersomnia, Insomnia) Â· Parasomnia (REM behavior disorder, Night
terror) Â· Nightmare  
Sexual dysfunction

Erectile dysfunction Â· Premature ejaculation Â· Vaginismus Â· Dyspareunia Â·
Hypersexuality Â· Female sexual arousal disorder  
Postnatal

Postpartum depression Â· Postnatal psychosis  
Adult personality  
and behavior

Personality disorder Â· Impulse control disorder (Kleptomania,
Trichotillomania, Pyromania) Â· Factitious disorder (Munchausen syndrome) Â·
Ego-dystonic sexual orientation Â· Paraphilia (Voyeurism, Fetishism)  
Mental disorders  
diagnosed in childhood

Mental retardation

X-Linked mental retardation  
Psychological development  
(developmental disorder)

Specific

speech and language (expressive language disorder, aphasia, expressive
aphasia, receptive aphasia, Landau-Kleffner syndrome, lisp) Â· Scholastic
skills (dyslexia, dysgraphia, Gerstmann syndrome) Â· Motor function
(developmental dyspraxia)  
Pervasive

Autism Â· Rett syndrome Â· Asperger syndrome  
Behavioral and emotional

ADHD Â· Conduct disorder (ODD) Â· emotional disorder (Separation anxiety
disorder) Â· social functioning (Selective mutism, RAD, DAD) Â· Tic disorder
(Tourette syndrome) Â· Speech (Stuttering, Cluttering) Â· Stereotypic movement
disorder  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schizophrenia"

Categories: Schizophrenia | Disability | Greek loanwords | Mental illness
diagnosis by DSM and ICD | Psychosis

Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Articles with obsolete
information | Featured articles

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Kalaallisut
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 17:22.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



