
# I Am Legend (film)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the 2007 film starring Will Smith. For Richard
Matheson's novel, see I Am Legend.

I Am Legend  
<IMG>  
Theatrical release poster  
Directed by Francis Lawrence  
Produced by Akiva Goldsman  
David Heyman  
James Lassiter  
Neal H. Moritz  
Written by Screenplay:  
Akiva Goldsman  
Mark Protosevich  
Novel:  
Richard Matheson  
Starring Will Smith  
Alice Braga  
Salli Richardson  
Willow Smith  
Charlie Tahan  
Abbey and Kona  
Music by James Newton Howard  
Cinematography Andrew Lesnie  
Editing by Wayne Wahrman  
Studio Village Roadshow Pictures  
Weed Road Pictures  
Overbrook Entertainment  
Distributed by Warner Bros.  
Release date(s) December 14, 2007  
Running time Theatrical cut:  
100 min.  
Alternate cut:  
104 min.  
Country <IMG> United States  
Language English  
Budget $150,000,000  
Gross revenue $585,349,010[1]  
I Am Legend is a 2007 post-apocalyptic science fiction film directed by
Francis Lawrence and starring Will Smith. It is the third feature film
adaptation of Richard Matheson's 1954 novel of the same name, following 1964's
The Last Man on Earth and 1971's The Omega Man.[2] Smith plays virologist
Robert Neville, who is immune to a vicious man-made virus originally created
to cure cancer. He works to create a cure while living in Manhattan in 2012, a
city inhabited by animalistic victims of the virus.

Warner Bros. began developing I Am Legend in 1994, and various actors and
directors were attached to the project, though production was delayed due to
budgetary concerns related to the script. Production began in 2006 in New York
City, filming mainly on location in the city, including a $5 million scene[3]
at the Brooklyn Bridge, the most expensive scene ever filmed in the city at
the time. Warner Bros. launched a tie-in comic and an online multiplayer game
on Second Life as part of its marketing campaign. I Am Legend was released on
December 14, 2007 in the United States. It opened to the largest ever box
office for a non-Christmas film released in the U.S. in December. The film's
commercial success "cemented [Smith's] standing as the number one box office
draw in Hollywood."[4]

## Contents

  * 1 Plot
    * 1.1 Alternate ending
  * 2 Cast
  * 3 Production
    * 3.1 Development
    * 3.2 Casting
    * 3.3 Filming
    * 3.4 Effects
  * 4 Release
    * 4.1 Marketing
    * 4.2 Box office
    * 4.3 Home release
    * 4.4 Critical reception and awards
  * 5 Prequel
  * 6 Bibliography
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Plot

The film opens in 2009 with a televised news broadcast with Dr. Krippen (Emma
Thompson) who has created a cure for cancer (100% cure rate) by altering the
measles virus.

In a post-apocalyptic 2012, U.S. Army virologist, Lieutenant Colonel Robert
Neville (Will Smith) is left as the last healthy human in New York City and
possibly the entire world. A series of flashbacks and recorded news programs
reveal that the genetically re-engineered measles virus mutated into a lethal
airborne strain that spread worldwide and killed 5.4 billion people, 90% of
humanity. Only 12 million possessed a natural immunity. The remaining 588
million degenerated into primal, aggressive beings referred to as
"Darkseekers" (the DVD subtitles refer to them as hemocytes) who have a
painful intolerance to UV radiation, forcing them to hide in buildings and
other dark places during the day. The "Darkseekers" exhibit superhuman speed,
agility, and strength. They also retain some problem-solving intelligence and
the capacity to organize. The immune regular humans were hunted, killed by
other humans, killed by the infected, or committed suicide.

Neville's daily routine includes experimentation to find a cure for the virus
and trips through a Manhattan devoid of humanity to hunt for food and
supplies. He also waits each day for a response to his continuous recorded
radio broadcasts, which instruct any uninfected survivors to meet him at
midday at the South Street Seaport. Flashbacks reveal that his wife (Salli
Richardson) and daughter Marley apparently died in a helicopter accident
during the chaotic evacuation of Manhattan, prior to the military-enforced
quarantine of the island in 2009. Neville's isolation is broken only by the
companionship of his dog Samantha ("Sam"), interaction with mannequins he has
set up as patrons of a video store, and recordings of old news and
entertainment broadcasts.

Neville sets a snare trap and captures an infected woman. An infected male
(who later would seem to be the Alpha Male in his group of infected) roars at
Neville from the building, exposing himself for a few seconds to sunlight,
something Neville regards as unusual since direct sunlight causes the
creatures to burn. Back in his laboratory, located in the basement of his
heavily fortified Washington Square Park home, Neville attempts to treat the
infected woman without success. Shortly thereafter, he is ensnared in a trap
after investigating a mannequin posed in the street. Caught in the trap he
passes out. By the time Neville wakes up it is dusk and when Neville finally
gets free, the Alpha Male releases a pack of infected dogs to attack him, one
of which bites Sam (although dogs are unaffected by the airborne strain of the
virus, they are still affected by the contact strain). After Neville and Sam
manage to kill the dogs, Neville takes the wounded Sam back to his lab. Sam
tries to bite him, and Neville is forced to strangle and kill his dog. Later
that night, after Sam's funeral, he recklessly attacks a group of infected in
an attempt to end his life and in revenge for what happened to Sam. They
overwhelm Neville and nearly kill him, but he is rescued by a pair of immune
survivors, Anna (Alice Braga) and a young boy named Ethan (Charlie Tahan), who
have traveled from Maryland after hearing one of his broadcasts. They take the
injured Neville back to his home where Anna explains that they survived the
outbreak aboard a Red Cross evacuation ship from SÃ£o Paulo and are making
their way to a putative survivors' camp in Bethel, Vermont. Anna tells Neville
that she believes God has a plan for them. Neville goes into a rage and argues
that there are no survivors, no God and that "everybody is dead."

Neville attempts to lower the infected woman's body temperature so the cure
can take effect. That night, the Alpha Male leads a group of infected in an
attack on the house, having followed Anna and Neville back the night before.
They overrun its defenses and force Neville, Anna, and Ethan to retreat into
the basement laboratory. They seal themselves in with the infected woman,
where they discover that Neville's treatment is working. By now Neville has
worked out a cure for the virus and takes a sample of the infected female's
blood, containing the treatment, and gives a vial of it to Anna, telling her
that she's right and God has a plan. He pushes Anna and Ethan into an old coal
chute, and then sacrifices himself to save their lives, using a hand grenade
to kill himself and the attacking infected.

Anna and Ethan escape to Vermont, and locate the survivor's colony, where Anna
hands over the cure. In the closing voice-over, she states that Neville's cure
enabled humanity to survive and rebuild, thus establishing his legend.

### [edit] Alternate ending

The tone of the film's ending was altered before the film's release,
especially the stand-off between Neville and the infected in his laboratory.
Visual effects supervisor Janek Sirrs recounts the original ending starting
with the stand-off: "At that point, Neville'sâand the
audience'sâassumptions about the nature of these creatures are shown to be
incorrect. We see that they have actually retained some of their humanity.
There is a very important moment between the Alpha Male and Neville. The Alpha
Male slapped his hand on the glass and smeared it revealing a butterfly shaped
imprint." Neville realizes that the Alpha Male is identifying the infected
woman he was experimenting on by a butterfly tattoo, and that the Alpha Male
wants her back. Demonstrating that he will cease fighting and return her,
Neville is allowed to approach them, with the Alpha Male ordering the infected
not to touch him. Neville brings the Alpha Female back to consciousness, still
infected due to him having removed the cure, and the Alpha Male embraces her;
David Schaub stated, "Then, when Neville finally turns the Alpha Female over
to the Alpha Male, there is this little love moment between the two of them."
Neville and the Alpha Male then exchange stares; Neville apologizes to them,
which the Alpha Male acknowledges before the infected leave. He then looks at
the photos of the infected he has experimented on and killed and realizes that
he is the monster of their legends; the infected think of him as someone who
hunts down and kills their people. The original final shot follows Neville,
Anna, and Ethan as they cross the remnants of the George Washington Bridge in
hopes of finding other survivors, accompanied by a recording from Anna telling
possible survivors that there is hope, and Neville knows the compounds of the
cure, meaning he can recreate it and help humanity survive and rebuild, thus
establishing his legend.[5]

## [edit] Cast

  * Will Smith \- Robert Neville
  * Emma Thompson \- Dr. Krippen
  * Alice Braga \- Anna
  * Charlie Tahan \- Ethan
  * Salli Richardson \- Zoe Neville
  * Abbey and Kona - Sam the Dog
  * Dash Mihok \- Infected Alpha Male
  * Joanna Numata \- Infected Alpha Female
  * Pat Fraley \- President (voice)
  * Mike Patton \- Creature Vocal Effects

## [edit] Production

### [edit] Development

The early 1990s brought a reemergence of the science fiction horror genre.[6]
In 1995, Warner Bros. began developing the film project, having owned the
rights to Richard Matheson's 1954 novel I Am Legend since 1970[7] and The
Omega Man (1971). Mark Protosevich was hired to write the script after the
studio was impressed with his spec script of The Cell (2000). Protosevich's
first draft took place in the year 2000 in San Francisco, California, and
contained many similarities with the finished film, though Ann was a morphine
addict. Warner Bros. immediately put the film on fast track, attaching Neal H.
Moritz as producer.[6]

Actors Tom Cruise, Michael Douglas,[8] Mel Gibson[6] had been considered to
star in the film,[8] using a script by Protosevich and with Ridley Scott as
director; however, by June 1997 the studio's preference was for actor Arnold
Schwarzenegger, and in July, Scott and Schwarzenegger finalized
negotiations,[9] with production slated to begin the coming September,[8]
using Houston as a stand-in for the film's setting of Los Angeles.[10] Scott
had Protosevich replaced by a screenwriter of his own choosing, John Logan,
with whom he spent months of intensive work on a number of different drafts.
The Scott/Logan version of I Am Legend was a bold, artistic mash of scifi
action and psychological thriller, without dialogue in the first hour and with
a sombre ending.[6] The studio, fearing its lack of commercial appeal and
merchandising potential, began to worry about the liberties they had given
Scott - then on a negative streak of box office disapointments - and urged the
production team to reconsider the lack of action in the screenplay. After an
"esoteric" draft by writer Neal Jimenez, Warner Bros. reassigned Protosevich
to the project, reluctantly working with Ridley Scott again.[6]

In December 1997, the project was called into question when the projected
budget escalated to $108 million due to media and shareholder scrutiny of the
studio in financing a big-budget film.[11] Scott rewrote the script in an
attempt to reduce the film's budget by $20 million,[12] but in March 1998, the
studio canceled the project due to continued budgetary concerns[13], and quite
possibly to the box office dissapointment of Scott's last three films, 1492:
Conquest of Paradise, White Squall and G.I. Jane.[6] Likewise,
Schwarzenegger's recent films at the time (Eraser and Warner Bros. own Batman
& Robin) underperformed, and the studio's latest experiences with big budget
scifi movies Sphere and The Postman were negative as well.[6] In August 1998,
director Rob Bowman was attached to the project,[14] with Protosevich hired to
write a third all new draft, far more action-oriented than his previous
versions[6], but the director (who reportedly wished for Nicolas Cage to play
the lead) moved on to direct Reign of Fire[15] and the project did not get off
the ground.

In March 2002, Schwarzenegger became the producer of I Am Legend, commencing
negotiations with Michael Bay to direct and Will Smith to star in the
film.[16] Bay and Smith were attracted to the project based on a redraft that
would reduce its budget.[17] However, the project was shelved due to Warner
Bros. president, Alan F. Horn's dislike of the script.[18] In 2004, Akiva
Goldsman was asked by head of production Jeff Robinov to produce the film.[19]
In September 2005, director Francis Lawrence signed on to helm the project,
with production slated to begin in 2006. Guillermo del Toro was originally
approached to direct by Smith but turned it down in order to direct Hellboy
II: The Golden Army.[20] Lawrence, whose film Constantine was produced by
Goldsman, was fascinated by empty urban environments. He said, "Something's
always really excited me about that... to have experienced that much loss, to
be without people or any kind of social interaction for that long."[19]

Goldsman took on the project as he admired the second I Am Legend film
adaptation, The Omega Man.[21] A rewrite was done to distance the project from
the other zombie films inspired by the novel,[16] particularly 28 Days
Later.[21] A forty-page scene-by-scene outline of the film was developed by
May 2006. When delays occurred on Will Smith's film Hancock (2008), which was
scheduled for 2007, it was proposed to switch the actor's films. This meant
filming would have to begin in sixteen weeks: production was green lit, using
Goldsman's script and the outline.[19] Elements from Protosevich's script were
introduced, while the crew consulted with experts on infectious diseases and
solitary confinement.[21] Rewrites continued throughout filming, because of
Smith's improvisational skills and Lawrence's preference to keep various
scenes silent.[19] The director had watched Jane Campionâs film The Piano
with a low volume so as to not disturb his newborn son, and realized that
silence could be very effective cinema.[22]

### [edit] Casting

Will Smith signed on to play Robert Neville in April 2006.[23] He said he took
on I Am Legend because he felt it could be like "Gladiator [or] Forrest
Gumpâthese are movies with wonderful, audience-pleasing elements but also
uncompromised artistic value. [This] always felt like it had those
possibilities to me."[21] The actor found Neville to be his toughest acting
challenge since portraying Muhammad Ali in Ali (2001). He said that "when
you're on your own, it is kind of hard to find conflict." The film's dark tone
and exploration of whether Neville has gone insane during his isolation meant
Smith had to restrain himself from falling into a humorous routine during
takes.[24] To prepare for his role, Smith visited the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention in Georgia. He also met with a person who had been in
solitary confinement and a former prisoner of war.[25] Smith compared Neville
to Job, who lost his children, livelihood and health. Like the Book of Job, I
Am Legend studies the questions, "Can he find a reason to continue? Can he
find the hope or desire to excel and advance in life? Or does the death of
everything around him create imminent death for himself?"[16] He also cited an
influence in Tom Hanks' performance in Cast Away (2000).[21]

Abbey, a three-year-old German Shepherd Dog, played Neville's dog Sam. Another
dog, Kona, was used for scenes where Neville plays fetch with his companion,
as Abbey refused to perform these scenes.[26] The rest of the supporting cast
consists of Salli Richardson as Zoe, Robert's wife,[27] and Alice Braga as a
survivor named Anna.[27] Willow Smith, Will Smith's daughter, makes her film
debut as Marley, Neville's daughter.[28] Emma Thompson has an uncredited role
as Dr. Alice Krippin, who appears on television explaining her vaccine for
cancer that mutates into the virus.[29] Singer Mike Patton provided the
guttural screams of the infected "hemocytes," and Dash Mihok provided the
character animation for the "Alpha Male" infected. There were several filler
characters with uncredited roles in old news broadcasts and flashbacks, such
as the unnamed President's voice, and the cast of The Today Show.

### [edit] Filming

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Brooklyn Bridge served as a location in I Am Legend, at which there was a
$5 million scene filmed, the most expensive scene to date in New York City.

Akiva Goldsman decided to move the story from Los Angeles to New York City to
take advantage of locations that would more easily show emptiness.[7] Goldsman
explained, "L.A. looks empty at three o'clock in the afternoon, [but] New York
is never empty . . . it was a much more interesting way of showing the
windswept emptiness of the world."[24] Warner Bros. initially rejected this
idea because of the logistics,[19] but Francis Lawrence was determined to
shoot on location, to give the film a natural feel that would benefit from not
shooting on soundstages. Lawrence went to the city with a camcorder, and
filmed areas filled with crowds. Then, a special effects test was conducted to
remove all those people. The test had a powerful effect on studio
executives.[22] Michael Tadross convinced authorities to close busy areas such
as the Grand Central Terminal viaduct, several blocks of Fifth Avenue and
Washington Square Park.[19] The film was shot primarily in the anamorphic
format, with flashback scenes shot in Super 35.[30]

Filming began on September 23, 2006.[31] The Marcy Avenue Armory in
Williamsburg was used for the interior of Neville's home,[24] while Greenwich
Village was used for the exterior.[16] Other locations include the Tribeca
section of Lower Manhattan, the aircraft carrier Intrepid, the Kingsbridge
Armory in the Bronx and St. Patrick's Cathedral.[7] Weeds were imported from
Florida and were strewn across locations to make the city look like it had
overgrown with them.[19] The closure of major streets was controversial with
New Yorkers. Will Smith said, "I don't think anyone's going to be able to do
that in New York again any time soon. People were not happy. That's the most
middle fingers I've ever gotten in my career."[16]

A bridge scene was filmed for six consecutive nights in January on the
Brooklyn Bridge to serve as a flashback scene in which New York's citizens
evacuate the city. Shooting the scene consumed $5 million of the film's
reported $150 million budget, which was the most expensive shot in the city to
date.[citation needed] The scene, which had to meet requirements from fourteen
government agencies, involved 250 crew members and 1,000 extras, including 160
National Guard members.[32][33] Also present were several Humvees, three
Stryker armored vehicles, a 110-foot (34 m) cutter, a 41-foot (12 m) utility
boat, and two 25-foot (7.6 m) Response Boat Small craft, as well as other
vehicles including taxis, police cars, fire trucks, and ambulances.[34]
Filming concluded on March 31, 2007.[31]

Reshoots were conducted around November 2007. Lawrence noted, "We weren't
seeing fully rendered shots until about a month ago. The movie starts to take
on a whole other life. It's not until later that you can judge a movie as a
whole and go, 'Huh, maybe we should shoot this little piece in the middle, or
tweak this a little bit.' It just so happened that our re-shoots revolved
around the end of the movie."[35]

### [edit] Effects

A week into filming, Francis Lawrence felt the infected (referred to as "Dark
Seekers" or "hemocytes" in the script), who were being portrayed by actors
wearing prosthetics, were not convincing. His decision to use computer-
generated imagery (CGI) resulted in an increased budget and extended post-
production, and the end results were poorly received.[36][37][38][not in
citation given] The concept behind the infected was that their adrenal glands
were open all of the time and Lawrence explained, "They needed to have an
abandon in their performance that you just canât get out of people in the
middle of the night when theyâre barefoot. And their metabolisms are really
spiked, so theyâre constantly hyperventilating, which you canât really get
actors to do for a long time or they pass out."[19] The actors remained on set
to provide motion capture.[24] "The film's producers and sound people wanted
the creatures in the movie to sound somewhat human, but not the standard," so
Mike Patton, former lead singer of Faith No More, was engaged to provide the
screams and howls of the infected.[39]

In addition, CGI was used for the lions and deer in the film, and to erase
pedestrians in shots of New York. Workers visible in windows, spectators and
moving cars in the distance were all removed. In his vision of an empty New
York, Lawrence cited John Ford as his influence: "We didn't want to make an
apocalyptic movie where the landscape felt apocalyptic. A lot of the movie
takes place on a beautiful day. There's something magical about the empty city
as opposed to dark and scary that was the ideal that the cast and crew
wanted."[21]

## [edit] Release

I Am Legend was originally slated for a November 21, 2007 release in the
United States and Canada,[40] but was delayed to December 14, 2007.[41] The
film opened on December 26, 2007 in the United Kingdom,[42] and the Republic
of Ireland having been originally scheduled for January 4, 2008.[24]

In December 2007, China banned the release of American films in the
country,[43] which is believed to have delayed the release of I Am Legend.
Will Smith spoke to the chairman of China Film Group about securing a release
date, later explaining, "We struggled very, very hard to try to get it to work
out, but there are only a certain amount of foreign films that are allowed
in."[25]

### [edit] Marketing

A tie-in comic from DC Comics and Vertigo Comics has been created, I Am
Legend: Awakening.[44] The project draws upon collaboration from Bill
Sienkiewicz, screenwriter Mark Protosevich, and author Orson Scott Card. The
son of the original book's author, Richard Christian Matheson, also
collaborated on the project. The project will advance from the comic to an
online format in which animated featurettes (created by the team from Broken
Saints) will be shown on the official website.[45]

In October 2007, Warner Bros. Pictures in conjunction with the Electric Sheep
Company launched the online multiplayer game I Am Legend: Survival in the
virtual world Second Life. The game is the largest launched in the virtual
world in support of a film release, permitting people to play against each
other as the infected or the uninfected across a replicated 60 acres (240,000
m2) of New York City.[46] The studio also hired the ad agency Crew Creative to
develop a website that would be specifically viewable on the iPhone.[47]

### [edit] Box office

I Am Legend grossed $77,211,321 on its opening weekend in 3,606 theaters,
averaging $21,412 per venue, and placing it at the top of the box office. This
set a record for highest grossing opening for a film for the month of
December.[48] As of May 11, 2008, the film has grossed $256,393,010 in North
America and $584,015,483 worldwide.[1] The film was the 6th highest grossing
movie of 2007 in North America, and as of July 2008 stands among the top 50
all-time highest grossing films both domestically and worldwide.

### [edit] Home release

The film was released on DVD on March 18, 2008 in two editions: a one-disc
release, including the movie with four animated comics ("Death As a Gift",
"Isolation", "Sacrificing the Few for the Many", and "Shelter"), and other
DVD-ROM features; a two-disc special edition that includes all these extras
and an alternative theatrical version of the movie with an alternate ending.
On the high-definition end, the movie has been released on the Blu-ray Disc
format and HD DVD format along with the DVD release; with the HD-DVD version
being released later on April 8, 2008.[49] Both HD releases include all the
features available in the two-disc DVD edition.[50] The two-disc version is
also available in a steel case, which contains evacuation protocol information
on the back side. The DVD version of the film included a digital copy.

The film also got Ultimate Collector's Edition DVD which was released on
December 9, 2008.

According to the-numbers.com, the film has sold 5.8 million DVDs and earned
$107.9 million in revenue after twelve weeks, making it the fifth best-selling
DVD of 2008.[51] However, Warner Bros was reportedly "a little disappointed"
with the film's performance on the DVD market.[52]

### [edit] Critical reception and awards

Most critics were favorable towards the film.[53] Review aggregate website
Rotten Tomatoes reported that 69 percent of 193 critics gave the film positive
write-ups. Similarly, Metacritic determined that the film had received an
average score of 65 out of 100 based on 37 reviews.[53] While much of the
negative criticism has concerned the film's third act,[36][37][38] some
critics favored the alternative ending in the DVD release.[54]

A. O. Scott wrote that Will Smith gave a "graceful and effortless performance"
and also noted the "third-act collapse". He felt that the movie "does ponder
some pretty deep questions about the collapse and persistence of human
civilization".[55] The consensus among favorable reviews was that Will Smith's
performance overcame questionable special effects.[56] Dana Stevens of Slate
wrote that the movie lost its way around the hour mark, noting that "the
Infected just aren't that scary."[29] NPR critic Bob Mondello noted the film's
subtext concerning global terrorism and that this aspect made the film fit in
perfectly with other, more direct cinematic explorations of the subject.[57]
Richard Roeper gave the film a positive review on the television program At
the Movies with Ebert & Roeper, commending Will Smith as being in "prime
form", also saying there are "some amazing sequences" and that there was "a
pretty heavy screenplay for an action film."[58] On the negative side, the
film has been criticized for diverging from Matheson's novel, especially in
its portrayal of a specifically Christian theme.[59]

Popular Mechanics published an article on December 14, 2007[60] addressing
some of the scientific issues raised by the film:

  1. the rate of deterioration of urban structures, infrastructure, and survival of fauna and flora
  2. the plausibility of a retrovirus spreading out of control as depicted in the film. (The measles virus depicted in the film, however, is not a retrovirus, but is in fact a part of the Paramyxovirus family.)
  3. the mechanics of the Brooklyn Bridge's destruction

The magazine solicited reactions from author Alan Weisman, virologist W. Ian
Lipkin, M.D., and Michel Bruneau, Ph.D., comparing their predictions with the
film's depictions. The article raised the most questions regarding the virus'
mutation and the medical results, and pointed out that a suspension bridge
like the Brooklyn Bridge would likely completely collapse rather than losing
only its middle span. Neville's method of producing power using gasoline-
powered generators seemed the most credible: "This part of the tale is
possible, if not entirely likely," Popular Mechanics editor Roy Berendsohn
says.

I Am Legend earned four nominations for the Visual Effects Society Awards,[61]
and was also nominated for Outstanding Performance by a Stunt Ensemble at the
Screen Actors Guild Awards,[62] Outstanding Film and Actor at the Image
Awards,[63] and Best Sound at the Satellite Awards. In June 2008, Will Smith
won a Saturn Award for Best Actor.[64] Will Smith also won the MTV Award for
Best Male Performance.

## [edit] Prequel

Francis Lawrence confirmed that there will be a prequel and that Will Smith
will be reprising his role. He stated that this movie would reveal what
happens to Neville before the infected take over New York. D. B. Weiss has
been recruited to write the script, while Lawrence would direct "if we figure
out the story." Smith stated the film would have Neville and his team going
from New York City to Washington, D.C. and back again, as they made their last
stand.[65] The film will again explore the premise of what it's like to be
alone, as Lawrence explained, ". . . the tough thing is, how do we do that
again and in a different way?"[66] It is expected for a 2011 release.[67][68]

## [edit] Bibliography

  * I Am Legend, Richard Matheson, Tor Books; Reissue edition (October 30, 2007), ISBN 0765318741

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b "I Am Legend (2007)". Box Office Mojo. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=iamlegend.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-23.
  2. ^ Before I Am Legend's release in cinemas in 2007, the direct-to-DVD I Am Omega was released by The Asylum to cash-in on the adaptation's potential success. Todd McCarthy (2007-12-07). "I Am Legend review". Variety. http://www.variety.com/review/VE1117935602.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-18.
  3. ^ "A 'Legend' in the Making". Hollywood Reporter. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/content_display/television/features/e3i75150efee777f4aeaf5bf8e90b207030. Retrieved on 2008-03-23.
  4. ^ Gitesh Pandya (2007-12-16). "Box Office Guru Wrapup: Will Smith Rescues Industry With Explosive Opening For I Am Legend". Rotten Tomatoes. http://www.rottentomatoes.com/news/1697664. Retrieved on 2007-12-17.
  5. ^ Billington, Alex (2008-03-05). "Must Watch: I Am Legend's Original Ending - This is Amazing". Firstshowing.net. http://www.firstshowing.net/2008/03/05/must-watch-i-am-legends-original-ending-this-is-amazing/. Retrieved on 2008-06-23.
  6. ^ a b c d e f g h David Hughes (2002-04-22). "Legend of the Fall: Will Ridley Scott's I Am Legend Rise From The Dead". The Greatest Sci-Fi Movies Never Made. Chicago Review Press. ISBN 1556524498.
  7. ^ a b c Lewis Beale (2007-01-14). "A variation on vampire lore that won't die". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/01/14/movies/14beal.html?_r=1&partner=rssnyt&emc=rss&oref=slogin. Retrieved on 2007-11-06.
  8. ^ a b c Anita M. Busch (1997-06-05). "Scott, Arnold: 'Legend'-ary duo?". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1116679906.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-05-02.
  9. ^ Anita M. Busch (1997-07-02). "Scott is stuff of 'Legend'". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1116677570.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-05-02.
  10. ^ Louis B. Parks (1997-08-22). "Arnold's 'Legend' coming here". Houston Chronicle.
  11. ^ Michael Fleming (1997-12-04). "'Legend' may not live on; Leighton lightens up". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR111729674.html?categoryid=3&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-05-02.
  12. ^ Chris Petrikin (1998-04-13). "Fox reins in 'Riders'". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117469681.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-05-02.
  13. ^ "Schwarzenegger's 'Legend' is in peril". Chicago Tribune. 1998-03-16.
  14. ^ Benedict Carver (1998-08-18). "Col taps duo for 'Space'". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117479598.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-05-02.
  15. ^ Charles Lyons (2000-07-17). "Bowman will reign over Spyglass' 'Fire'". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117783821.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-05-02.
  16. ^ a b c d e Chris Lee (2007-11-04). "Will Smith: a one-man show". Los Angeles Times. http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/news/movies/la-ca-smith4nov04,1,783335.story?ctrack=5&cset=true. Retrieved on 2007-11-06.
  17. ^ Michael Fleming (2002-03-17). "'Legend' rekindled by Arnold". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117864047.html?categoryid=1201&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-05-02.
  18. ^ Vanessa Juarez (2006-05-19). "Most Delayed Movie Ever?". Entertainment Weekly. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,1195658,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-02.
  19. ^ a b c d e f g h David M. Halbfinger (2007-11-04). "The City That Never Sleeps, Comatose". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/04/movies/moviesspecial/04halb.html?ref=moviesspecial. Retrieved on 2007-11-05.
  20. ^ Michael Fleming (2005-09-13). "Helmer takes on 'Legend' for WB". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117929062.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-05-02.
  21. ^ a b c d e f Jeff Jensen (2007-08-16). "Will Smith: Making a 'Legend'". Entertainment Weekly. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20052055,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-08.
  22. ^ a b Ian Nathan (January 2008). "Last Man Standing". Empire. pp. 109-114.
  23. ^ Michael Fleming (2006-04-25). "'Legend' reborn again at Warners". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117942073?cs=1. Retrieved on 2006-08-23.
  24. ^ a b c d e Ian Nathan (October 2007). "I Am Legend". Empire. pp. 78-81.
  25. ^ a b Min Lee (2007-12-07). "Will Smith says new film 'I Am Legend' hasn't secured China release". Associated Press. http://www.iht.com/articles/ap/2007/12/07/arts/AS-A-E-MOV-China-Will-Smith.php. Retrieved on 2007-12-07.
  26. ^ Adam Markowitz (2007-11-02). "The Dog". Entertainment Weekly. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20156358,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-05.
  27. ^ a b Wilson Morales (2006-09-19). "I Am Legend casting news". Blackfilm.com. http://www.blackfilm.com/20060915/features/iamlegendnews.shtml. Retrieved on 2006-09-19.
  28. ^ Paul Davidson (2006-10-04). "Another Smith Joins Legend". IGN. http://movies.ign.com/articles/737/737180p1.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-15.
  29. ^ a b Dana Stevens (2007-12-14). "I Am Legend, reviewed". Slate. http://www.slate.com/id/2179940/fr/flyout. Retrieved on 2007-12-14.
  30. ^ Simon Gray (2008-02-01). "Island of Lost Souls". American Cinematographer (Los Angeles, California, United States: American Society of Cinematographers) 89 (2): p. 32. ISSN 0002-7928.
  31. ^ a b Garth Franklin (2006-08-16). ""I Am Legend" Taking Time To Film". Dark Horizons. http://www.darkhorizons.com/news06/060816i.php. Retrieved on 2006-08-23.
  32. ^ Joseph Steuer (2007-04-24). "A 'Legend' in the making". The Hollywood Reporter. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/content_display/television/features/e3i75150efee777f4aeaf5bf8e90b207030. Retrieved on 2007-04-26.
  33. ^ Addiego, Walter (2007-12-14). "Review: I, human - Will Smith plays last man standing in 'I Am Legend'". San Francisco Chronicle. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2007/12/14/DDCFTTNAT.DTL. Retrieved on 2007-12-22.
  34. ^ Joseph Steuer (2007-04-24). "Government agencies cover filmmakers in red tape". Reuters. http://www.reuters.com/article/filmNews/idUSN2335654320070424. Retrieved on 2007-09-17.
  35. ^ "Francis Lawrence on I Am Legend Re-shoots". ShockTillYouDrop.com. 2007-12-03. http://www.shocktillyoudrop.com/news/topnews.php?id=3861. Retrieved on 2007-12-03.
  36. ^ a b Maher, Kevin (2007-12-27). "I Am Legend review". The Times. http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/film/film_reviews/article3097177.ece. Retrieved on 2008-01-24.
  37. ^ a b Bloom, Bob (2007-12-13). "I Am Legend review". rec.arts.movies.reviews. http://uk.rottentomatoes.com/m/i_am_legend/articles/1697152/1.php. Retrieved on 2008-01-23.
  38. ^ a b Corliss, Richard (2007-12-14). "Will Smith Gets Lost in His Legend". TIME. http://www.time.com/time/arts/article/0,8599,1694609,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-23.
  39. ^ Harris, Chris (2007-12-13). "Mike Patton Hits The Big Screen, Voicing 'I Am Legend' Baddies And Scoring 'Perfect' Indie Flick". MTV Networks. http://www.mtv.com/movies/news/articles/1576342/story.jhtml. Retrieved on 2008-01-03.
  40. ^ "Shooting Dates for I Am Legend". ComingSoon.net. 2006-08-16. http://www.comingsoon.net/news/movienews.php?id=16042. Retrieved on 2007-04-26.
  41. ^ "I Am Legend". ComingSoon.net. http://www.comingsoon.net/films.php?id=11189. Retrieved on 2007-04-26.
  42. ^ "UK Film release schedule". Film Distributors' Association. http://www.launchingfilms.com/releaseschedule/schedule.php?sort=date&startmonth=12&startyear=2007. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.
  43. ^ Patrick Frater (2007-12-05). "China sets 3 month ban on U.S. films". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117977089.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-12-07.
  44. ^ "I Am Legend: Awakening". Warner Bros.. http://iamlegend.warnerbros.com/awakeningweek1/comicBook.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-23.
  45. ^ Erik Amaya (2007-07-28). "CCI: This Book is Legend". Comic Book Resources. http://www.comicbookresources.com/news/newsitem.cgi?id=11384. Retrieved on 2007-07-30.
  46. ^ Warner Bros. Pictures (2007-10-12). "I Am Legend: Survival Launched in Second Life". ComingSoon.net. http://www.comingsoon.net/news/movienews.php?id=38311. Retrieved on 2007-10-12.
  47. ^ Carly Mayberry (2007-10-11). "Site a 'Legend' for iPhone". The Hollywood Reporter. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/content_display/film/news/e3ia61ae1e154c4c9b508e95a3bb8aa055f. Retrieved on 2007-11-09.
  48. ^ "âI Am Legendâ sets big box-office record". MSNBC. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/22285096/. Retrieved on 2007-12-16.
  49. ^ Charles Lyons. "I Am Legend on DVD, HD DVD and Blu-ray". http://www.dvdtown.com/news/i-am-legend-on-dvd-hd-dvd-and-blu-ray/5129. Retrieved on 2008-02-03.
  50. ^ Charles Lyons. "I Am Legend on DVD, HD DVD and Blu-ray". http://www.dvdtown.com/news/i-am-legend-on-dvd-hd-dvd-and-blu-ray/5129. Retrieved on 2008-02-03.
  51. ^ http://www.the-numbers.com/dvd/charts/annual/2008.php
  52. ^ 2008 Q1 about even with last year: Blu-ray helped offset drops in consumer spending. 2008-04-16, Videobusiness.com
  53. ^ a b "I Am Legend (2007): Reviews". Metacritic. http://www.metacritic.com/film/titles/iamlegend. Retrieved on 2008-01-02.
  54. ^ "IGN: I Am Legend (Two-Disc Special Edition) Review". http://uk.dvd.ign.com/articles/858/858614p1.html.
  55. ^ A. O. Scott (2007-12-14). "Man About Town, and Very Alone". New York Times. http://movies.nytimes.com/2007/12/14/movies/14lege.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-14.
  56. ^ "I Am Legend - Rotten Tomatoes". Rotten Tomatoes. http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/i_am_legend/. Retrieved on 2008-03-25.
  57. ^ "'I Am Legend' a One-Man American Metaphor". 2007-12-14. http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=17260869. Retrieved on 2008-01-24.
  58. ^ "I Am Legend review". http://bventertainment.go.com/tv/buenavista/ebertandroeper/index2.html?sec=1&subsec=5561. Retrieved on 2007-12-25.
  59. ^ Journal of Religion & Film: Film Review: I Am Legend reviewed by Christopher M. Moreman
  60. ^ McCarthy, Erin (2007-12-14), "I Am Legend's Junk Science: Hollywood Sci-Fi vs. Reality", Popular Mechanics, http://www.popularmechanics.com/science/worst_case_scenarios/4236920.html?page=1, retrieved on 2007-12-29
  61. ^ "Visual Effects Society (VES) Announces Nominees for 6th Annual VES Awards" (PDF). Visual Effects Society. http://www.visualeffectssociety.com/downloads/NomineesPressRelease2008.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-01-23.
  62. ^ "Nominations Announced for the 14th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". Screen Actors Guild. 2007-12-20. http://www.sagawards.org/PR_071220. Retrieved on 2008-01-23.
  63. ^ "Nominees for the 39th NAACP Image Awards Announced" (PDF). NAACP. http://www.naacpimageawards.net/PDFs/NOMINEES_FOR_39TH_NAACP_IMAGE_AWARDS_ANNOUNCED.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-01-23.
  64. ^ "2007 12th Annual Satellite Awards". International Press Academy. http://www.pressacademy.com/satawards/awards2007.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-01-23.
  65. ^ Steve Weintraub (2008-12-05). "Will Smith talks I AM LEGEND prequel". Collider. http://www.collider.com/entertainment/news/article.asp/aid/10055/tcid/1. Retrieved on 2008-12-06.
  66. ^ "Director Talks "I Am Legend" Prequel". WorstPreviews.com. 2009-01-16. http://www.worstpreviews.com/headline.php?id=11673&count=0. Retrieved on 2000-01-23.
  67. ^ "I Am Legend prequel confirmed". MovieFix. 2008-09-26. http://www.yourmovies.com.au/news/?i=140375&action=news. Retrieved on 2008-10-07.
  68. ^ "'I Am Legend' prequel in the works". UPI. 2008-09-26. http://www.upi.com/Entertainment_News/2008/09/26/I_Am_Legend_prequel_in_the_works/UPI-45231222443469/. Retrieved on 2008-10-07.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: I Am
Legend (film)  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: I Am Legend (film)  
  * Official website
  * I Am Legend at the Internet Movie Database
  * I Am Legend at Allmovie
  * I Am Legend at Box Office Mojo
  * I Am Legend at Rotten Tomatoes
  * I Am Legend at Metacritic
  * Detailed Comparison between Theatrical Cut and Alternative Theatrical Cut

Preceded by  
The Golden Compass Box office number-one films of 2007 (USA)  
December 16 Succeeded by  
National Treasure: Book of Secrets  
Preceded by  
Enchanted Box office number-one films of 2007 \- 2008 (UK)  
December 30, 2007 - January 13, 2008 Succeeded by  
Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Richard Matheson's I Am Legend  
Novel

I Am Legend (1954)  
Films

The Last Man on Earth (1964) â¢ The Omega Man (1971)  
Film Series

I Am Legend (2007) â¢ I Am Legend Prequel (2011)  
Film Actors

Will Smith  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_Am_Legend_(film)"

Categories: English-language films | 2007 films | American science fiction
films | Doomsday films | Films based on horror novels | Films based on Richard
Matheson works | Films based on science fiction novels | Films set in New York
City | Films set in the 2010s | Films shot anamorphically | Films shot in
multiple formats | Films shot in New York City | Films shot in Super 35 |
Monster movies | 2000s science fiction films | Post-apocalyptic films |
Science fiction horror films | Warner Bros. films

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 22:17.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



