
# Labrador Retriever

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Labrador Retriever <IMG>  
This yellow Labrador's nose is pink rather than black, a feature called "snow
nose" or "winter nose."  
Nicknames Lab  
Labby  
Labrador  
Country of origin Canada  
Traits  
Weight Male 27â36 kg (60â80 lb)  
Female 25â32 kg (55â70 lb)  
Height Male 56â63 cm (22â25 in)  
Female 54â60 cm (21â24 in)  
Coat Smooth and oily  
Color Black, chocolate, or yellow.  
Litter size 10â12 pups  
Life span 10â13 years  
Classification & standards  
FCI Group 8 Section 1 #122 standard  
AKC Sporting standard  
ANKC Group 3 (Gun dogs) standard  
CKC Group 1 â Sporting Dogs standard  
KC (UK) Gun dog standard  
NZKC Gun dog standard  
UKC Gun Dog standard  
The Labrador Retriever (also Labrador, Labby, or Lab for short) is one of
several kinds of retriever, a type of gun dog. The Labrador is the most
popular breed of dog (by registered ownership) in the world, and is by a large
margin the most popular breed by registration in the United States (since
1991),[1] and the United Kingdom,[2]. It is also the most popular breed of
assistance dog in the United States, Australia, and many other countries, as
well as being widely used by police and other official bodies for their
detection and working abilities.[3] They are exceptionally affable, gentle,
intelligent, energetic and good natured,[4][3] and Labradors are generally
considered good companions for people of all ages (including a high level of
patience and tolerance for children),[5][6] making them both excellent
companions and working dogs. With training, the Labrador is one of the most
dependable, obedient and multi-talented breeds in the world.[4][3][7]

## Contents

  * 1 Description
    * 1.1 Appearance
      * 1.1.1 Show standards
      * 1.1.2 Colour
        * 1.1.2.1 Nose and skin pigmentation
      * 1.1.3 Variant lines
      * 1.1.4 Non-variants
    * 1.2 Temperament
  * 2 Use as working dogs
  * 3 Health and well-being
    * 3.1 Inherited disorders
    * 3.2 Other disorders
    * 3.3 Obesity
    * 3.4 Exploration
    * 3.5 Significant crossbreeds
  * 4 Demography
  * 5 History
    * 5.1 Early descriptions
    * 5.2 Name
    * 5.3 Historical landmarks
    * 5.4 History of subtypes
    * 5.5 Appearance in other countries
  * 6 Famous labradors
  * 7 References
  * 8 Further reading

  
## [edit] Description

<IMG>

<IMG>

A black lab

### [edit] Appearance

Labradors are relatively large, with males typically weighing 30â36 kg
(65â80 lb) and females 25â32 kg (55â70 lb). Labs weighing close to or
over 100 lbs are considered obese or having a major fault under American
Kennel Club standards, although some labs weigh significantly more.[8] The
majority of the characteristics of this breed, with the exception of colour,
are the result of breeding to produce a working retriever.

As with some other breeds, the English (typically "show" or "bench") and the
American (typically "working" or "field") lines differ. Today, "English" and
"American" lines exist in both the United Kingdom and in North America. In
general, however, in the United Kingdom, Labs tend to be bred as medium-sized
dogs, shorter and stockier with fuller faces and a slightly calmer nature than
their American counterparts, which are regionally often bred as taller,
lighter-built dogs. These two types are informal and not codified or
standardised; no distinction is made by the AKC or other kennel clubs, but the
two types come from different breeding lines. Australian stock also exists;
though not seen in the west, they are common in Asia.

The breed tends to shed hair twice annually, or regularly throughout the year
in temperate climates.[9] Some labs shed a lot; however, individual labs
vary.[6] Labrador hair is usually fairly short and straight, and the tail
quite broad and strong. The otter-like tail and webbed toes of the Labrador
Retriever make them excellent swimmers. Their interwoven coat is also
relatively waterproof, providing more assistance for swimming.

#### [edit] Show standards

Like any animal, there is a great deal of variety among Labs. These
characteristics are typical of the conformation show bred (bench-bred) lines
of this breed in the United States, and are based on the AKC standard.[8]
Significant differences between US and UK standards are noted.

  * Size: Labs are a medium-large but compact breed. They should have an appearance of proportionality. They should be as long from the shoulders back as they are from the floor to the withers. Males should stand 22.5-24.5 inch (55.9-62.5 cm) tall at the withers and weigh 65â80 lb (30â36 kg). Females should stand 21.5â23.5 inch (54.5â60 cm) and weigh 55â70 lb (25â32 kg). By comparison under UK Kennel Club standards, height should be 22â22.5 inch (55.9â57.2 cm) for males, and 21.5â22 inch (54.6â55.9 cm) for bitches.[10]

  * Coat: The Lab's coat should be short and dense, but not wiry. The coat is described as 'water-resistant' or more accurately 'water-repellent' so that the dog does not get cold when taking to water in the winter. That means the dog naturally has a slightly dry, oily coat. Acceptable colours are chocolate, black, and yellow. A small white spot on the chest on black labs is the only acceptable variance from a solid coloured coat, but it is not ideal. There is much variance within yellow Labs. Colours should be solid, though varying shades of yellow on the same dog are acceptable in yellow labs.

  * Head: The head should be broad with a pronounced stop and slightly pronounced brow. The eyes should be kind and expressive. Appropriate eye colours are brown and hazel. The lining around the eyes should be black. The ears should hang close to the head and are set slightly above the eyes.

  * Jaws: The jaws should be strong and powerful. The muzzle should be of medium length, and should not be too tapered. The jaws should hang slightly and curve gracefully back.

  * Body: The body should be strong and muscular with a level top line.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Chocolate Labrador

The tail and coat are designated "distinctive [or distinguishing] features" of
the Labrador by both the Kennel Club and AKC.[10][8] The AKC adds that "true
Labrador Retriever temperament is as much a hallmark of the breed as the
'otter' tail."[8]

#### [edit] Colour

There are three recognised colours for Labs:[8] black (a solid black colour),
yellow (anything from light cream to gold to "fox-red"), and chocolate (medium
to dark brown). There are no such things as silver or golden Labradors, a
common mistake for the Yellow variant. There is also a black-and-tan coat
type, but this coat colour is the least popular as it renders the Labrador un-
showable except in the UK.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Fox Red Labrador

Puppies of all colours can potentially occur in the same litter. Colour is
determined primarily by two genes. The first gene (the B locus) determines the
density of the coat's pigment granules: dense granules result in a black coat,
sparse ones give a chocolate coat. The second (E) locus determines whether the
pigment is produced at all. A dog with the recessive e allele will produce
little pigment and will be yellow regardless of its genotype at the B
locus.[11] Variations in numerous other genes control the subtler details of
the coat's colouration, which in yellow Labs varies from white to light gold
to a fox red. Chocolate and black Labs' noses will match the coat colour.

##### [edit] Nose and skin pigmentation

Because Labrador colouration is controlled by multiple genes, it is possible
for recessive genes to emerge some generations later and also there can
sometimes be unexpected pigmentation effects to different parts of the body.
Pigmentation effects appear in regard to yellow Labradors, and sometimes
chocolate, and hence the majority of this section covers pigmentation within
the yellow Labrador. The most common places where pigmentation is visible are
the nose, lips, gums, feet, tail, and the rims of the eyes, which may be
black, brown, light yellow-brown ("liver", caused by having two genes for
chocolate),[12] or several other colours. A Labrador can carry genes for a
different colour, for example a black Labrador can carry recessive chocolate
and yellow genes, and a yellow Labrador can carry recessive genes for the
other two colours. DNA testing can reveal some aspects of these. Less common
pigmentations (other than pink) are a fault, not a disqualification, and hence
such dogs are still permitted to be shown.[12] The intensity of black pigment
on yellow Labs is controlled by a separate gene independent of the fur
colouring.[12] Yellow Labradors usually have black noses, which may gradually
turn pink with age (called "snow nose" or "winter nose"). This is due to a
reduction in the enzyme tyrosinase which indirectly controls the production of
melanin, a dark colouring. Tyrosinase is temperature dependentâhence light
colouration can be seasonal, due to cold weatherâand is less produced with
increasing age two years old onwards. As a result, the nose colour of most
yellow Labs becomes a somewhat pink shade as they grow older.[12]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Yellow Labrador with a pink nose.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A seven-week-old Dudley Labrador Retriever. The nose and lips are pink or
flesh-coloured, the defining aspect of Dudley pigmentation, as compared to the
more standard brown or black.

A colouration known as "Dudley" is also possible. Dudleys are variously
defined as yellow Labs which have no pigmented (pink) noses (LRC), yellow with
liver/chocolate pigmentation (AKC), or "flesh coloured" in addition to having
the same colour around the rims of the eye, rather than having black or dark
brown pigmentation.[12][9] A yellow Labrador with brown or chocolate
pigmentation, for example, a brown or chocolate nose, is not necessarily a
Dudley, though according to the AKC's current standard it would be if it has
chocolate rims around the eyes (or more accurately of the genotype eebb).
Breed standards for Labradors considers a true Dudley to be a disqualifying
feature in a conformation show Lab, such as one with a thoroughly pink nose or
one lacking in any pigment along with flesh coloured rims around the eyes.
True Dudleys are extremely rare.[12][13]

Breeding in order to correct pigmentation often lacks dependability. Because
colour is determined by many genes, some of which are recessive, crossbreeding
a pigmentation non-standard yellow Labrador to a black Labrador may not
correct the matter or prevent future generations carrying the same recessive
genes. For similar reasons, crossbreeding chocolate to yellow labs is also
often avoided.

#### [edit] Variant lines

<IMG>

<IMG>

These chocolate Labradors from field-bred stock are typically lighter in build
and have a shorter coat than conformation show Labrador.

Differences in the physical build of the dog have arisen as a result of
specialised breeding. Dogs bred for hunting and field-trial work are selected
first for working ability, whereas dogs bred to compete in the sport of
conformation showing are selected for the characteristics sought by judges in
the show ring. There are significant differences between field and trial-bred
(sometimes referred to as "American") and show-bred (or "English") lines of
Labradors. In general, show-bred Labs are heavier, slightly shorter-bodied,
and have a thicker coat and tail. Field Labs are generally longer legged,
lighter, and more lithe in build. In the head, show Labs tend to have broader
heads, better defined stops, and more powerful necks, while field Labs have
lighter and slightly narrower heads with longer muzzles.[14][15] Field-bred
Labs are commonly higher energy and more high-strung compared to the Lab bred
for conformation showing, and as a consequence may be more suited to working
relationships rather than being a "family pet."[14][15] Of course, each
individual dog differs. Some breeders, especially those specialising in the
field type, feel that breed shows do not adequately recognise their type of
dog. There is also occasional debate regarding officially splitting the
breed.[16] In the United States, the AKC and the Labrador's breed club have
set the breed standard to accommodate the field-bred Labrador somewhat. For
instance, the AKC withers-height standards allow conformation dogs to be
slightly taller than the equivalent British standard.[17] However, dual
champions, or dogs that excel in both the field and the show ring, are
becoming more unusual.[18]

#### [edit] Non-variants

Terms such as "golden", "silver", "blue", "white", "red" or "grey" as variants
are not recognised. The term "Golden Labrador" has been used both as an
incorrect term for yellow labradors of a golden shade,[19] and also for any
Labrador-Golden Retriever crossbreed of any colour, including black.[20] White
is a light shade of yellow (officially referred to as 'light cream' or 'pale
yellow' in the standard),[21][22][23] and silver is either not recognised or
registered as chocolate (officially registered by the AKC as chocolate labs
with variant colour).[8][21] Claims that some "rare" variants exist or have
been verified by DNA testing, or the like, are widely considered to be a
'scam'.[21][24]

### [edit] Temperament

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Labrador participating in dog agility

Labradors are a well-balanced, friendly and versatile breed, adaptable to a
wide range of functions as well as making very good pets. As a rule they are
not excessively prone to being territorial, pining, insecure, aggressive,
destructive, hypersensitive, or other difficult traits which sometimes
manifest in a variety of breeds, and as the name suggests, they are excellent
retrievers. As an extension of this, they instinctively enjoy holding objects
and even hands or arms in their mouths, which they can do with great
gentleness (a Labrador can carry an egg in its mouth without breaking it).[25]
They are also known to have a very soft feel to the mouth, as a result of
being bred to retrieve game such as waterfowl. They are prone to chewing
objects (though they can be trained out of this behaviour). The Labrador
Retriever's coat repels water to some extent, thus facilitating the extensive
use of the dog in waterfowl hunting.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Labs, like other dogs, may dig holes, like this 3 month old pictured next to a
German Shepherd.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Labradors enjoy playing with water

Labradors have a reputation as a very mellow breed and an excellent family dog
(including a good reputation with children of all ages and other animals),[9]
but some lines (particularly those that have continued to be bred specifically
for their skills at working in the field rather than for their appearance) are
particularly fast and athletic. Their fun-loving boisterousness and lack of
fear may require training and firm handling at times to ensure it does not get
out of handâan uncontrolled adult can be quite problematic. Females may be
slightly more independent than males.[9] Labradors mature at around three
years of age; before this time they can have a significant degree of puppyish
energy, often mislabelled as being hyperactive.[26][9] Because of their
enthusiasm, leash-training early on is suggested to prevent pulling when full-
grown.[27] Labs often enjoy retrieving a ball endlessly and other forms of
activity (such as agility, frisbee, or flyball). They are considerably "food
and fun" oriented, very trainable, and open-minded to new things, and thrive
on human attention, affection and interaction, of which they find it difficult
to get enough. Reflecting their retrieving bloodlines, almost every Lab loves
playing in water or swimming.

<IMG>

<IMG>

This sociable Labrador pup has become acquainted with a kitten.

Although they will sometimes bark at noise, especially a degree of "alarm
barking" when there is noise from unseen sources, Labs are not on the whole
noisy[9] or territorial, and are often very easygoing and trusting with
strangers, and therefore are not usually suitable as guard dogs.[9]

Labradors have a well-known reputation for appetite, and some individuals may
be highly indiscriminate, eating digestible and non-food objects alike.[25]
They are persuasive and persistent in requesting food. For this reason, the
Labrador owner must carefully control his/her dog's food intake to avoid
obesity and its associated health problems (see below).[25]

The steady temperament of Labs and their ability to learn make them an ideal
breed for search and rescue, detection, and therapy work. Their primary
working role in the field continues to be that of a hunting retriever.

## [edit] Use as working dogs

<IMG>

<IMG>

Labradors are a very popular selection for use as guide dogs.

Labradors are an intelligent breed with a good work ethic and generally good
temperaments (breed statistics show that 91.5% of Labradors who were tested
passed the American Temperament Test.[28]) Common working roles for Labradors
include: hunting, tracking and detection, disabled-assistance, carting, and
therapy work.[29] Approximately 60â70% of all guide dogs in the United
States are Labradors; other common breeds are Golden Retrievers and German
Shepherd Dogs.[30]

The high intelligence, initiative and self-direction of Labradors in working
roles is evinced by individuals such as Endal, who during a 2001 emergency is
believed to be the first dog to have placed an unconscious human being in the
recovery position without prior training, then obtaining the human's mobile
phone, "thrusting" it by their ear on the ground, then fetching their blanket,
before barking at nearby dwellings for assistance.[31] A number of labradors
have also taught themselves to assist their owner in removing money and credit
cards from ATMs without prior training.[32]

## [edit] Health and well-being

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Lab standing with hind legs close together to compensate for hip dysplasia.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Many dogs, including Labs such as this twelve year old, show distinct
whitening of the coat as they grow older; especially around the muzzle.

<IMG>

<IMG>

An old Labrador, showing problem in eyes, and signs of obesity

Labrador pups should not be brought home before they are 7â10 weeks old.
Their life expectancy is generally 12 to 13 years,[33] and it is a healthy
breed with relatively few major problems. Notable issues related to health and
wellbeing include:

### [edit] Inherited disorders

  * Labs are somewhat prone to hip and elbow dysplasia,[34] especially the larger dogs,[35] though not as much as some other breeds.[36] Hip scores are recommended before breeding.
  * Labs also suffer from the risk of knee problems. A luxating patella is a common occurrence in the knee where the leg is often bow shaped.
  * Eye problems are also possible in some Labs, particularly progressive retinal atrophy, cataracts,[37] corneal dystrophy[34] and retinal dysplasia. Dogs which are intended to be bred should be examined by a veterinary ophthalmologist for an eye score.
  * Hereditary myopathy, a rare inherited disorder that causes a deficiency in type II muscle fibre.[38]
  * There is a small incidence of other conditions, such as autoimmune diseases and deafness in labs, either congenitally or later in life.[6]

### [edit] Other disorders

Labs are sometimes prone to ear infection, because their floppy ears trap warm
moist air. This is easy to control, but needs regular checking to ensure that
a problem is not building up unseen. A healthy Labrador ear should look clean
and light pink (almost white) inside. Darker pink (or inflamed red), or
brownish deposits, are a symptom of ear infection. The usual treatment is
regular cleaning daily or twice daily (being careful not to force dirt into
the sensitive inner ear) and sometimes medication (ear drops) for major cases.
As a preventative measure, some owners clip the hair carefully around the ear
and under the flap, to encourage better air flow. Labradors also get cases of
allergic reactions to food or other environmental factors.

### [edit] Obesity

Labs can easily become overweight, due to their blatant enjoyment of treats,
hearty appetites, and endearing behaviour towards people. Lack of activity is
also a contributing factor. A healthy Labrador should keep a very slight
hourglass waist and be fit and light, rather than fat or heavy-set. Excessive
weight is strongly implicated as a risk factor in the later development of hip
dysplasia or other joint problems and diabetes, and also can contribute to
general reduced health when older. Osteoarthritis is commonplace in older,
especially overweight, Labs. A 14 year study covering 48 dogs by food
manufacturer Purina showed that labs fed to maintain a lean body shape
outlived those fed freely, by around two years, emphasizing the importance of
not over-feeding.[39]

### [edit] Exploration

Labradors are not especially renowned for escapology. They do not typically
jump high fences or dig. Because of their personalities, some Labs climb
and/or jump for their own amusement. As a breed they are highly intelligent
and capable of intense single-mindedness and focus if motivated or their
interest is caught. Therefore, with the right conditions and stimuli, a bored
Labrador could "turn into an escape artist par excellence".[40][9]

Labradors as a breed are curious, exploratory and love company, following both
people and interesting scents for food, attention and novelty value. In this
way, they can often "vanish" or otherwise become separated from their owners
with little fanfare.[41] They are also popular dogs if found, and at times may
be stolen.[42] Because of this a number of dog clubs and rescue organisations
(including the UK's Kennel Club) consider it good practice that Labradors are
microchipped, with the owner's name and address also on their collar and
tags.[43][41]

### [edit] Significant crossbreeds

The "Labradoodle" is a popular "designer dog" that combines a Labrador with a
Poodle, to create a hybrid that is more suited to allergy sufferers.

Some assistant-dog groups use Golden Retriever / Labrador Retriever hybrids
(officially called a Golden Labrador Retriever) as they have found it can
produce a dog with a more suitable temperament[44].It is important to use dogs
from good stocks since crossbreeds are not immune to such problems and since
Golden Retrievers and Labradors have similar health problems.

The assistance dog organization Mira utilises Labrador-Bernese Mountain Dog
crosses ("Labernese") with success.[45]

Further information: Dog hybrids and crossbreeds

## [edit] Demography

Main article: List of most popular dog breeds

The Labrador is an exceptionally popular dog. For example as of 2006[update]:

    
  * Widely considered the most popular breed in the world.[46][47][4]
  * Most popular dog by ownership in USA (since 1991),[48][49] UK,[50] Australia,[51] New Zealand[52] and Canada.[53]
  * In both the UK and USA, there are well over twice as many Labradors registered as the next most popular breed.[48][50] If the comparison is limited to dog breeds of a similar size, then there are around 3 - 5 times as many Labradors registered in both countries as the next most popular breeds, the German Shepherd and Golden Retriever.[48][50]
  * Most popular breed of assistance dog in the United States, Australia and many other countries, as well as being widely used by police and other official bodies for their detection and working abilities.[3] Approximately 60â70% of all guide dogs in the United States are Labradors (see below).[30]
  * Seven out of 13 of the Australian National Kennel Council "Outstanding Gundogs" Hall of Fame appointees are Labradors (list covers 2000-2005).[54]

There is no global registry of Labradors, nor detailed information on numbers
of Labradors living in each country. The countries with the five largest
numbers of Labrador registrations as of 2005 are: 1: United States 2: United
Kingdom and France (approximately equal), 4: Sweden, 5: Finland.[55][56]
Sweden and Finland have far lower populations than the other three countries,
suggesting that as of 2005[update] these two countries have the highest
proportion of labs per million people:

    
     Country Population  
(millions) Labrador  
registrations Registrations per  
million pop.  
Finland 5.2 2236 426.0  
France 60.5 9281 153.4  
Sweden 9.0 5158 570.5  
United Kingdom 59.7 18554 311.0  
USA 298.2 10833 36.3  
Yellow and black labs are registered in very similar numbers; chocolate in
lesser numbers.[55][56]

    Note: number of registrations is not necessarily the same as number of living dogs at any given time.
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Nell - A St. John's Dog circa 1856.

The early Labrador originated on the island of Newfoundland, now part of the
province of Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada.[57] The breed emerged over time
from the St. John's Water Dog, also an ancestor of the Newfoundland dog (to
which the Labrador is closely related), through ad-hoc breedings by early
settlers in the mid to late 16th century.[57] The original forebears of the
St. John's dog have variously been suggested to be crossbreeds of the black
St. Hubert's hound from France, working water dogs from Portugal, old European
pointer breeds and dogs belonging to the indigenous peoples of the area.[57]
From the St. John's Dog, two breeds emerged; the larger was used for hauling,
and evolved into the large and gentle Newfoundland dog, likely as a result of
breeding with mastiffs brought to the island by the generations of Portuguese
fishermen who had been fishing offshore since the 1400s. The smaller short-
coat retrievers used for retrieval and pulling in nets from the water were the
forebears of the Labrador Retriever. The white chest, feet, chin, and muzzle
characteristic of the St. John's Dog often appears in Lab mixes, and will
occasionally manifest in Labs as a small white spot on the chest or stray
white hairs on the feet or muzzle.

The St. John's area of Newfoundland was settled mainly by the English and
Irish. Local fishermen originally used the St. John's dog to assist in
bringing nets to shore; the dog would grab the floating corks on the ends of
the nets and pull them to shore. A number of these were brought back to the
Poole area of England in the early 1800s,[57] then the hub of the Newfoundland
fishing trade, by the gentry, and became prized as sporting and waterfowl
hunting dogs.[57] A few kennels breeding these grew up in England; at the same
time a combination of sheep protection policy (Newfoundland) and rabies
quarantine (England) led to their gradual demise in their country of
origin.[58]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A surviving picture of Buccleuch Avon (b.1885), the foundational dog of many
modern Labradors.

The first and second Earls of Malmesbury, who bred for duck shooting on his
estate,[59] and the 5th and 6th Dukes of Buccleuch, and youngest son Lord
George William Montagu-Douglas-Scott,[59] were instrumental in establishing
the Labrador breed in nineteenth century England. The dogs Avon ("Buccleuch
Avon") and Ned given by Malmesbury to assist the Duke of Buccleuch's breeding
program in the 1880s are usually considered the ancestors of all modern
Labradors.[9]

### [edit] Early descriptions

Two early descriptions exist. In 1822, explorer W.E. Cormack crossed the
island of Newfoundland by foot. In his journal he wrote "The dogs are
admirably trained as retrievers in fowling, and are otherwise useful.....The
smooth or short haired dog is preferred because in frosty weather the long
haired kind become encumbered with ice on coming out of the water."[60]

Another early report by a Colonel Hawker described the dog as "by far the best
for any kind of shooting. He is generally black and no bigger than a Pointer,
very fine in legs, with short, smooth hair and does not carry his tail so much
curled as the other; is extremely quick, running, swimming and fighting....and
their sense of smell is hardly to be credited...."[60]

### [edit] Name

There is some confusion in the naming of the early breed; the Labrador
Retriever was originally called the St. John's dog (from which it emerged), or
lesser Newfoundland, but these were also considered distinct breeds by other
sources. Other origins suggested for the name include the Spanish or
Portuguese word for rural/agricultural workers, Portuguese "lavradores" or
Spanish "labradores," and the village of Castro Laboreiro in Portugal whose
herding and guard dogs bear a "striking resemblance" to Labradors.[57]

### [edit] Historical landmarks

The first written reference to the breed was in 1814 ("Instructions to Young
Sportsmen" by Colonel Peter Hawker),[57] the first painting in 1823 ("Cora. A
Labrador Bitch" by Edwin Landseer),[57] and the first photograph in 1856 (the
Earl of Home's dog "Nell", described both as a Labrador and a St. Johns
dog).[58] By 1870 the name Labrador Retriever became common in England.[57]
The first yellow Labrador on record was born in 1899 (Ben of Hyde, kennels of
Major C.J. Radclyffe),[57] and the breed was recognised by the Kennel Club in
1903. The first American Kennel Club (AKC) registration was in 1917.[57] The
chocolate Labrador emerged in the 1930s,[57] although liver spotted pups were
documented being born at the Buccleuch kennels in 1892.[57] The St. John's dog
survived until the early 1980s, the last two individuals being photographed in
old age around 1981.[58]

### [edit] History of subtypes

Ancestral chocolate and butterscotch-yellow colours (sometimes called "liver"
or "golden") were noted in the original St. John's dogs as early as 1807, when
the Canton shipwrecked carrying a number of St. John's dogs for the Earl of
Malmesbury. Two dogs were later found, one black and one chocolate, evidence
that chocolate had been a colour in the original St. John's dogs.[58] Yellow
and chocolate pups, and occasional black and tan or brindling,[21][61] would
occasionally reappear (although often culled), until finally gaining
acceptance in the cases of chocolate and yellow or being mostly bred out of
the breed in the cases of black-and-tan and brindled, although until the 20th
century black was the preferred colour.

The first recognised yellow Labrador was Ben of Hyde, born 1899, and chocolate
labs became more established in the 1930s.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ben of Hyde (b.1899), the first recognised yellow Labrador.

Yellow (and related shades)

In the early years of the breed through to the mid-20th century, Labradors of
a shade we would now call "yellow" were in fact a dark, almost butterscotch,
colour (visible in early yellow Labrador photographs). The shade was known as
"Golden" until required to be changed by the UK Kennel Club, on the grounds
that "Gold" was not actually a colour. Over the 20th century a preference for
far lighter shades of yellow through to cream prevailed, until today most
yellow labs are of this shade.[62]

Interest in the darker shades of gold and fox red were re-established by
English breeders in the 1980s, and two dogs were instrumental in this change:
Balrion King Frost (black, born approx. 1976) who consistently sired "very
dark yellow" offspring and is credited as having "the biggest influence in the
re-development of the fox red shade",[62] and his great-grandson, the likewise
famous Wynfaul Tabasco (b.1986),[63] described as "the father of the modern
fox red Labrador", and the only modern fox red Show Champion in the UK. Other
dogs, such as Red Alert and Scrimshaw Placido Flamingo, are also credited with
greatly passing on the genes into more than one renowned bloodline.[62]

Chocolate labradors

Jack Vanderwyk traces the origins of all Chocolate labradors listed on the
LabradorNet database (some 34,000 labradors dogs of all shades) to eight
original bloodlines. However the shade was not seen as a distinct colour until
the 20th century; before then according to Vanderwyk, such dogs can be traced
but were not registered. A degree of crossbreeding with Flatcoat or Chesapeake
Bay retrievers was also documented in the early 20th century, prior to
recognition. Chocolate labradors were also well established in the early 20th
century at the kennels of the Earl of Feversham, and Lady Ward of
Chiltonfoliat.[64]

The bloodlines as traced by Vanderwyk each lead back to three black labradors
in the 1880sâBuccleuch Avon (m), and his sire and dam, Malmesbury Tramp (m),
and Malmesbury June (f). Morningtown Tobla is also named as an important
intermediary, and according to the studbook of Buccleuch Kennels, the
chocolates in that kennel came through FTW Peter of Faskally (1908).[64]

### [edit] Appearance in other countries

In the United States, the breed gained wider recognition following a 1928
American Kennel Gazette article, "Meet the Labrador Retriever". Before this
time, the AKC had only registered 23 Labradors in the country,[58] in part
because US and UK hunting styles had different requirements.[65] Labradors
acquired popularity as hunting dogs during the 1920s and especially after
World War II, as they gained recognition as combining some of the best traits
of the two favourite United States breeds as both game finders and water
dogs.[65]

Outside North America and Western Europe, the Labrador arrived later. For
example, the Russian Retriever Club traces the arrival of Labradors to the
late 1960s, as household pets of diplomats and others in the foreign
ministry.[66] The establishment of the breed in the Commonwealth of
Independent States (ex-USSR) was initially hindered by the relatively small
numbers of Labradors and great distances involved, leading to difficulty
establishing breedings and bloodlines;[66] at the start of the 1980s, home-
born dogs were still regularly supplemented by further imports from
overseas.[66] Difficulties such as these initially led to Labradors being
tacitly cross-bred to other types of retriever.[66] In the 1990s, improved
access to overseas shows and bloodlines is said to have helped this situation
become regularised.[66]

## [edit] Famous labradors

Main article: List of Labradors

As both the most popular breed by registered ownership and also the most
popular breed for assistance dogs in several countries, there have been many
notable and famous labradors since the breed was recognised.

A selection of a few of the most famous labradors within various categories
includes:

Assistance dogs

  * Endal, a service dog in England. Among other distinctions, "the most decorated dog in the world" (including "Dog of the Millennium"[67] and the PDSAâs Gold Medal for Animal Gallantry and Devotion to Duty),[68] the first dog to ride on the London Eye and the first dog known to work a 'chip and pin' ATM card. As of 2007 some three hundred camera crews from several countries have interviewed Endal and his owner/handler Allen Parton, and a film of a year in his life is in production.[69][70]

Police, military, rescue and detection dogs

  * Lucky and Flo, twin Black Labrador counterfeit detection dogs who became famous in 2007 for "sniffing out nearly 2 million pirated counterfeit DVDs" on a six-month secondment to Malaysia in 2007.[71] Following the multi-million dollar, 6-arrest Malaysian detection, they became the first dogs to be awarded Malaysia's, "outstanding service award",[72] and software pirates were stated to have put a Â£30,000 contract out for their lives.[73][74]

Pets

<IMG>

<IMG>

Vladimir Putin with Koni at his residence in Novo-Ogaryovo.

  * Former President of the United States Bill Clinton's Labradors Buddy and Seamus.
  * Former Russian President, and current Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin's Labrador 'Koni'.

Fiction and media

  * Labradors have featured variously as pets and significant characters in sitcoms and other TV shows, as well as other portrayals in the media. Bouncer in Neighbours, and Luath in The Incredible Journey, are two TV examples.
  * Marley is an American Labrador portrayed in Marley & Me, a book by John Grogan in which Grogan recounts his life and times with Marley.

Mascots and advertising

  * Since 1972, a yellow Labrador pup known as the Andrex Puppy has been an advertising symbol for Andrex (Cottonelle) toilet tissue.
  * Michigan State has an ongoing tradition of Zeke the Wonder Dog. The original "Zeke" and "Zeke III" were yellow labs and "Zeke II" was a black lab.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ AKC Dog Registration Statistics
  2. ^ 2006 Top 20 Breed Registrations - The Kennel Club
  3. ^ a b c d Tassieyy, Raye. "A Lab is". Labrador Retriever Club of South Australia Inc.. http://www.salabclub.com.au/?page=alabradorisa. Retrieved on 2007-09-12.
  4. ^ a b c "Labrador Retriever". dogbreedz.com. http://www.dogbreedz.com/dogbreeds/labrador-retriever.cfm. Retrieved on 2007-09-12.
  5. ^ Labrador Retriever
  6. ^ a b c "Sporting breeds: Labrador Retriever." animalforum.com. (c) 1998-2007. Retrieved on September 17, 2007.
  7. ^ Chandran, Padma. "Labrador Retriever". http://www.dogsindia.com/labrador_retriever.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-12.
  8. ^ a b c d e f "Labrador Retriever Breed Standard". American Kennel Club. 1994-03-31. http://www.akc.org/breeds/labrador_retriever/index.cfm. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  9. ^ a b c d e f g h i Miller, Liza Lee; Cindy Tittle Moore (2004-01-07). "FAQ Labrador Retrievers". Puget Sound Labrador Rescue. http://www.pslra.org/html/articles/faqs.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  10. ^ a b "Retriever (Labrador) Breed Standard. The Kennel Club May 11, 2016. Retrieved on September 17, 2017.
  11. ^ Davol, Pamela A.. "B/b, E/e, and Beyond: A Detailed Examination of Coat color Genetics in the Labrador Retriever". http://www.labbies.com/genetics2.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  12. ^ a b c d e f Wagner, Sharon; Laura Michaels. "Pigment in Yellow Labradors". http://www.woodhavenlabs.com/yellow-pigment.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  13. ^ "Labrador Retriever Breed Standards Comparison Chart". Canada's Guide to Dogs Website. 2006-03-14. http://www.canadasguidetodogs.com/labrador/labarticle6.htm.
  14. ^ a b Davol, Pamela A.. "History of the Labrador Retriever". http://www.labbies.com/history.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  15. ^ a b Michaelsons, Laura. "English or American Labrador?". Woodhaven Labradors. http://www.woodhavenlabs.com/english-american.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  16. ^ Wiest, Mary (2002). "Splitting the Breed" (PDF). Labrador Quarterly 2.635 (3). http://www.woodhavenlabs.com/documents/breed_split2.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-09-02.
  17. ^ AKC member club standard: "The height at the withers for a dog is 22-1/2 to 24-1/2 inches; for a bitch is 21-1/2 to 23-1/2 inches." and Kennel Club standard: "Ideal height at withers: dogs: 56-57 cms (22-221/2 ins); bitches: 55-56 cms (21 1/2-22 ins)."
  18. ^ Field vs. Show â Whatâs the Difference? by: Geoffrey A. English, 2006-12-6
  19. ^ "Labrador Retriever". Marjorie Field, People And Dogs Society (Registered charity no. 1005973). 2007. http://www.padsonline.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=44&Itemid=8. Retrieved on 2007-09-27.
  20. ^ "Golden Labrador: Golden Retriever/Labrador Retriever Hybrid". dogbreedinfo.com. 2007. http://www.dogbreedinfo.com/goldenlabrador.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-27.
  21. ^ a b c d "Labrador coat colour". Ashland Labradors. 2007. http://www.ashlandlabradors.net/Labradorcolor.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-27.
  22. ^ Shades of Yellow
  23. ^ http://www.blueknightlabs.com/articles/silver/silver.html
  24. ^ "The Truth Behind "Silver" Labradors". Sharon Wagner, Woodhaven Labradors. 2005. http://www.woodhavenlabs.com/silverlabs.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-27.
  25. ^ a b c "Labrador Retrievers". BBC News. 2001-05-01. http://www.bbc.co.uk/dna/h2g2/A545186. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  26. ^ Dougherty, Josephina. "Labrador Retrievers: The Perfect Companion & Family Dogs". Ecology Photographic. http://www.ecology.org/ecophoto/articles/Labs.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  27. ^ Davis/Diamond, Kathy. "Labrador Retriever Revelations". http://www.veterinarypartner.com/Content.plx?P=A&C=99&A=2244&S=0. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  28. ^ "ATTS Breed Statistics as of December 2006". American Temperament Test Society, Inc.. http://www.atts.org/stats5.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  29. ^ Moore, Cindy. "Working Dogs". http://www.k9web.com/dog-faqs/working.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  30. ^ a b Moore, Cindy Tittle. "Service Dogs". http://www.faqs.org/faqs/dogs-faq/service/. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  31. ^ Blystone, Richard; Mallary Gelb. "Assistance dogs are trained as partners for the disabled". CNN.com. http://archives.cnn.com/2000/HEALTH/08/10/super.dog/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  32. ^ "About Canine Partners". British Police and Services Canine Assistance. http://www.bpsca.co.uk/canine_partners.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  33. ^ Fogle, Bruce, DVM (2000). The New Encyclopedia of the Dog. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 0-7894-6130-7
  34. ^ a b "Labrador Retriever". Canine Inherited Disorders Database. http://www.upei.ca/~cidd/breeds/labradorretriever2.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-14.
  35. ^ Newton, C. D.; Nunamaker, D. M. (Eds.) "Textbook of Small Animal Orthopaedics." Published by the International Veterinary Information Service (Riser, Rhodes and Newton). p. 2.
  36. ^ "Hip dysplasia statistics". Orthopedic Foundation for Animals. 2006. http://www.offa.org/hipstatbreed.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  37. ^ Mitchell, P. "Canada's Guide to Dogs: Health Concerns for the Labrador Retriever". http://www.canadasguidetodogs.com/labrador/labarticle3.htm#eye. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  38. ^ Davol, Pamela A. "Skeletal muscle myopathy". http://www.labbies.com/hmlr.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-14.
  39. ^ "Purina Life Span Study". Purina Pet Institute. http://www.purina.com/company/press/2003/BodyFat.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-09-04.
  40. ^ "Labrador Retriever FAQs". Labs4rescue, Inc. http://www.labs4rescue.com/faq.html#19. Retrieved on 2007-09-14.
  41. ^ a b "All About ID Tags." all-about-labradors.com. (c) 2006-2007. Retrieved on September 18, 2007.
  42. ^ "'Lost' Dogs." The Dog Rescue Net. Last updated on April 24, 2006. Retrieved on September 17, 2007.
  43. ^ "Rescue News." The Labrador Rescue Trust Limited. Summer 2006. Retrieved on September 17, 2007.
  44. ^ http://www.guidedogs.org.uk/fileadmin/gdba/images/downloads/Cross.doc
  45. ^ Saint-Pierre, Ric. "The Labernese: A new breed serving humans." mira. Retrieved on February 18, 2007.
  46. ^ "The Right Breed". Stanley Coren, Puppy and Dog basics. 2007. http://www.puppyanddogbasics.com/pr2.asp. Retrieved on 2007-09-28. \-- Stanley Coren is a Professor of Psychology and author of many books on dogs and dog cognition.
  47. ^ "The Ultimate Labrador Retriever". Howell Book House. April 18 2003. http://www.amazon.ca/Ultimate-Labrador-Retriever-Heather-Wiles-Fone/dp/0764526391. Retrieved on 2007-09-28.
  48. ^ a b c "AKC Dog Registration Statistics". American Kennel Club. 2006. http://www.akc.org/reg/dogreg_stats_2006.cfm. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  49. ^ Edwards, Jim (March 2007). "WSAVA Monthly News - March, 2007". World Veterinary Association. http://www.worldvet.org/displayarticle3315.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  50. ^ a b c "Registration statistics for all recognised dog breeds, 2005 and 2006". UK Kennel Club. 2006. http://www.thekennelclub.org.uk/cgi-bin/item.cgi?id=926&d=pg_dtl_art_news&h=238&f=0. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  51. ^ "National Registration Statistics". Australian National Kennel Council. 2006. http://www.ankc.aust.com/nrs.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  52. ^ "Most popular dog breeds in New Zealand". dogstuff.co.nz. 2007. http://www.dogstuff.co.nz/dog-breeds/. Retrieved on 2007-09-26. "The Labrador Retriever remains New Zealandâs most popular dog...." - John Perfect, NZ Kennel Club President.
  53. ^ "Labrador Retriever â breed description & information". Canada's Guide to Dogs/P.Mitchell. 2007-09-21. http://www.canadasguidetodogs.com/retrieverlab.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-26.
  54. ^ "ANKC Hall of Fame". Australian National Kennel Council. http://www.ankc.aust.com/hall_of_fame.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  55. ^ a b Lanternier, Thomas; Philippe Canal (2004-2005). "Database Statistics". http://labrador.retriever.free.fr/stat.php?lang=en. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  56. ^ a b Vanderwyk, Jack (2004-2005). "Labrador Statistics". http://www.labradornet.com/labstats.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  57. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Barmore, Laura. "History of the Lab". http://alllabs.com/cgi-local/SoftCart.exe/labrador_retriever_history.htm?E+scstore. Retrieved on 2007-09-12.
  58. ^ a b c d e Dollevoet, Lori. "History of the Labrador Retriever". Lorken Farms. http://personal.pitnet.net/LDoll/labrador%20Retriever%20history.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-12.
  59. ^ a b "The Buccleuch Labrador". The Buccleuch Estates Limited. 2003. http://www.drumlanrig.co.uk/pages/content.asp?PageID=244. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  60. ^ a b "Labrador Retriever History". grandane.com Guide to Nova Scotia Kennels. 2007. http://www.grandane.com/NS.Kennels/Labhistory.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-09.
  61. ^ B/b, E/e, and Beyond
  62. ^ a b c Robbins, Joyce; Pam Naranjo and Gina Gross. "Fox Red Labradors:History of the Shade". Little River Labs. http://www.littleriverlabs.com/foxred.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  63. ^ "Labrador Genealogy". U.P. Labradors. http://www.uplabradors.com/uplabradorsgenealogy.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-03.
  64. ^ a b Vanderwyk, Jack. "Origins of Chocolate Labs" (PDF). http://www.lakecharlesretrieverclub.com/2-Origin_of_Chocolate_Labrador_Retrievers.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  65. ^ a b Dollevoet, Lori. "Origins of Labrador Retrievers". Lorken Farms. http://personal.pitnet.net/LDoll/labrador%20Retriever%20history.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  66. ^ a b c d e Teslenko, Olga. "History of Retrievers in Russia". The Russian Retriever Club. http://www.labrador.ru/en/history/legends.php. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  67. ^ "Hero dog to the rescue". Petersfield Herald. 4 June 2001. http://www.petersfield-herald-today.co.uk/today/options/news/newsdetail.cfm?id=27389&hididarch=archive. "The pair have appeared on television all over the country demonstrating how specially trained dogs can help profoundly disabled people. This week, as they recovered from their ordeal at the Steep home of Canine Partners for Independence, the group who trained Endal, Allen praised his four legged companion: âWeâve given so many demonstrations on how Endal should go into action if I fall out of my wheelchair but last Thursday Endal did it for realâ â¦ Endal was voted Dog of the Millennium by Dogs Today readers and Beta Pet Foods, Dog of the Year by the charities Pro Dogs and Pets As Therapy, and was the first ever winner of the Golden Bonio Award."
  68. ^ "Endal, December 2006" (html). Illinois Springer Spaniel Rescue. http://illinoisspringerrescue2.pulse.net/SITETWO/ENDAL.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-20.
  69. ^ "TV crew making film of partners' year". K9 Perspective Magazine, Issue 27. http://www.k9magazinefree.com/index.shtml.
  70. ^ "Crufts 2006 eventful for Allen and Endal". K9 Perspective Magazine, Issue 27. http://www.k9magazinefree.com/k9_perspective/iss27p11.shtml.
  71. ^ "Police Dogs Sniff for Pirated DVDs." ABC News. May 10, 2006. Retrieved on September 17, 2007.
  72. ^ Blass, Evan. "DVD-sniffing dogs awarded medals, returning to NYC." Engadget. August 20, 2007. Retrieved on September 17, 2007.
  73. ^ Chan, Sewell. "Fresh Off Malaysian Triumph, DVD-Sniffing Dogs Tackle New York." New York Times. August 28, 2007. Retrieved on September 17, 2007.
  74. ^ Blass, Evan. "DVD pirates put out hits on Lucky and Flo the crime dogs." Engadget. March 22, 2007. Retrieved on September 17, 2007.

## [edit] Further reading

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Labrador Retriever  
  * Cunliffe, Juliette (2004). The Encyclopedia of Dog Breeds. Parragon Publishing. ISBN 0-7525-8276-3.
  * Fergus, Charles (2002). Gun Dog Breeds, a Guide to Spaniels, Retrievers, and Pointing Dogs. Guilford, CT: Lyons Press. ISBN 1-58574-618-5.

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Dogs originating from Canada  
Extant

Canadian Eskimo Dog Â· Labrador Retriever Â· Landseer Â· Newfoundland Â· Nova
Scotia Duck-Tolling Retriever Â· Seppala Siberian Sleddog Â· Valley Bulldog

Flag of Canada  
Extinct

Hare Indian dog Â· Tahltan Bear Dog Â· St. John's Water Dog  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Breeds of gundog  
Pointers

English Setter Â· Gordon Setter Â· Irish Red and White Setter Â· Irish Setter
Â· Pointer Â· German Shorthaired Pointer  
Versatile gundogs

Ariege Pointer Â· Blue Picardy Spaniel Â· Bracco Italiano Â· Braque du
Bourbonnais Â· Braque d'Auvergne Â· Braque FranÃ§ais Â· Braque Saint-Germain
Â· Brittany Â· Cesky Fousek Â· German Longhaired Pointer Â· German Wirehaired
Pointer Â· Nippon Pointer Â· Large MÃ¼nsterlÃ¤nder Â· Old Danish Pointer Â·
Old Spanish Pointer Â· Picardy Spaniel Â· Portuguese Pointer Â· Pudelpointer
Â· Small MÃ¼nsterlÃ¤nder Â· Spanish Pointer Â· Spinone Italiano Â· Vizsla Â·
Weimaraner Â· Wirehaired Pointing Griffon  
Retrievers

Chesapeake Bay Retriever Â· Curly-Coated Retriever Â· Flat-Coated Retriever Â·
Golden Retriever Â· Labrador Retriever Â· Nova Scotia Duck-Tolling Retriever  
Spaniels

American Cocker Spaniel Â· Boykin Spaniel Â· Clumber Spaniel Â· English Cocker
Spaniel Â· English Springer Spaniel Â· Field Spaniel Â· French Spaniel Â·
German Spaniel Â· Pont-Audemer Spaniel Â· Russian Spaniel Â· Sussex Spaniel Â·
Welsh Springer Spaniel  
Water dogs

American Water Spaniel Â· Barbet Â· Irish Water Spaniel Â· Lagotto Romagnolo
Â· Poodle Â· Portuguese Water Dog Â· Spanish Water Dog Â· Wetterhoun  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labrador_Retriever"

Categories: Dog breeds | Sporting dogs | Dog breeds originating in Canada

Hidden categories: Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006
| All articles containing potentially dated statements | Articles containing
potentially dated statements from 2005

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 20:23.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



