
# Dave Eggers

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Dave Eggers  
<IMG>  
Eggers at the 2007 Brooklyn Book Festival  
Born March 12, 1970 (1970-03-12) (age 39)  
Boston, Massachusetts  
Pen name Daniel O'Mara, Lucy Thomas, Dr. and Mr. Doris Haggis-On-Whey, others  
Occupation writer, editor, publisher  
Nationality <IMG> United States  
Genres fiction, memoir, humor  
Official website  
Dave Eggers (born March 12, 1970) is an American writer, editor, and
publisher.

## Contents

  * 1 Life
  * 2 Literary work
  * 3 Musical contributions
  * 4 Bibliography
    * 4.1 Nonfiction
    * 4.2 Fiction
    * 4.3 Humor books
    * 4.4 Other
    * 4.5 As editor or contributor (non-McSweeney's publications)
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Life

Eggers was born in Boston, Massachusetts. His father was an attorney and his
mother a school teacher. When Eggers was still a child, the family moved to
the upscale suburb of Lake Forest, near Chicago. He attended high school
there, and was a classmate of the actor Vince Vaughn.[1]

Eggers attended the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, intending to
get a degree in journalism.[2] But his studies were interrupted by the sudden
death of both of his parents in 1991 â his mother from stomach cancer, and
his father from brain and lung cancer. These events were chronicled in his
first book, the lightly fictionalized A Heartbreaking Work of Staggering
Genius. At the time, Eggers was 21, and his younger brother Toph was 8.
Eggers's two older siblings were unable to commit to the care of Toph; his
older brother had a full-time job and his sister was enrolled in law school.
As a result, Eggers took responsibility for raising Toph.

Eggers left the University of Illinois and moved to Berkeley, California with
Toph and his girlfriend Kirsten. They initially moved in with Eggers's sister
and her roommate, but eventually found a place in another part of town, which
they paid for with money left to them by their parents. Toph attended a small
private school, and Eggers did temp work and freelance graphic design for a
local newspaper. Eventually, with his friend David Moodie, he took over a
local free newspaper titled Cups. This gradually evolved into the satirical
magazine Might.

Eggers currently lives in San Francisco and is married to the writer Vendela
Vida.[3] In October 2005, Vida gave birth to a daughter, October Adelaide
Eggers Vida.[4]

Eggers's brother Bill is a researcher who has worked for several conservative
think tanks, doing research on privatization.[5] His sister, Beth, claimed
that Eggers grossly understated her role in raising their brother Toph and
made use of her journals in writing A Heartbreaking Work of Staggering Genius
without compensating her.[6] She later recanted her claims in a posting on her
brother's own website McSweeney's Internet Tendency, referring to the incident
as "a really terrible LaToya Jackson moment".[7] On March 1, 2002, the New
York Post reported that Beth, then a lawyer in Modesto, California, had
committed suicide.[8] Eggers briefly spoke about his sister's death during a
2002 fan interview for McSweeney's.[9]

Eggers was one of three 2008 TED Prize recipients.[10] His TED Prize wish: for
community members to personally engage with local public schools.[11][12]

## [edit] Literary work

Sister project Wikinews has related news: 2007 Brooklyn Book Festival
showcases borough's continued literary tradition  
Eggers began writing as a Salon.com editor and founded Might magazine, while
also writing a comic strip called Smarter Feller (originally Swell, then Smart
Feller) for SF Weekly.[13] His first book was a memoir (with fictional
elements), A Heartbreaking Work of Staggering Genius (2000). It focuses on the
author's struggle to raise his younger brother in San Francisco following the
sudden deaths of their parents. The book quickly became a bestseller and was a
finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for General Non-Fiction. The memoir was
praised for its originality, idiosyncratic self-referencing, and for several
innovative stylistic elements. Early printings of the 2001 trade-paperback
edition were published with a lengthy, apologetic postscript entitled
"Mistakes We Knew We Were Making".

In 2002, Eggers published his first novel, You Shall Know Our Velocity, a
story about a frustrating attempt to give away money to deserving people while
haphazardly traveling the globe. An expanded and revised version was released
as Sacrament in 2003 and retitled You Shall Know Our Velocity! for its Vintage
imprint distribution. He has since published a collection of short stories,
How We Are Hungry, and three politically themed serials for Salon.com.[14] In
November 2005, Eggers published Surviving Justice: America's Wrongfully
Convicted and Exonerated, compiling the book of interviews with exonerees once
sentenced to death. The book was compiled with Lola Vollen, "a physician
specializing in the aftermath of large-scale human rights abuses" and "a
visiting scholar at the University of California, Berkeley's Institute of
International Studies and a practicing clinician."[15] Novelist Scott Turow
wrote the introduction to Surviving Justice. Eggers's most recent novel, What
Is the What: The Autobiography of Valentino Achak Deng (McSweeney's, 2006),
was a finalist for the 2006 National Book Critics Circle Award for
Fiction.[16] Eggers is also the editor of the Best American Nonrequired
Reading series, an annual anthology of short stories, essays, journalism,
satire, and alternative comics.

Eggers is the founder of McSweeney's, an independent publishing house.
McSweeney's produces a quarterly literary journal, McSweeney's, first
published in 1998; a monthly journal, The Believer, which debuted in 2003 and
is edited by wife Vida; and, beginning in 2005, a quarterly DVD magazine,
Wholphin. Other works include The Future Dictionary of America, Created in
Darkness by Troubled Americans, and the "Dr. and Mr. Haggis-On-Whey"
children's books of literary nonsense, which Eggers writes with his younger
brother. Ahead of the 2006 FIFA World Cup, Eggers wrote an essay about the US
national team and soccer in the United States for The Thinking Fan's Guide to
the World Cup, a book published with aid of the journal Granta, that contained
essays about each competing team in the tournament.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Eggers in October 2008

Eggers currently teaches writing in San Francisco at 826 Valencia, a nonprofit
tutoring center and writing school for children that he cofounded in 2002.
Eggers has recruited volunteers to operate similar programs in Los Angeles,
New York City, Seattle, Chicago, and Ann Arbor, Michigan, all under the
auspices of the nonprofit organization 826 National.[17] In 2006, he appeared
at a series of fundraising events, dubbed the Revenge of the BookâEaters
tour, to support these programs. The Chicago show, at the Park West theatre,
featured Death Cab for Cutie frontman Ben Gibbard. Other performers on the
tour included Sufjan Stevens, Jon Stewart, Davy Rothbart, and David Byrne.[18]
In September 2007, the Heinz Family Foundation awarded Eggers a $250,000 Heinz
Award (given to recognize "extraordinary achievements by individuals") in the
Arts and Humanities.[19] In accordance with Eggers's wishes, the award money
was all given to 826 National.[20]

Eggers was one of the original contributors to ESPN The Magazine and helped
create its section titled "The Jump". He also acted as the first "Answer Guy",
a column that still runs (without his involvement) in the publication.[21]

## [edit] Musical contributions

  * Eggers designed the artwork for Thrice's album Vheissu.[22]
  * Eggers can be heard talking with Spike Jonze during "The Horrible Fanfare/Landslide/Exoskeleton," the final track on Beck's 2006 album The Information. The third section of the track features Eggers and Jonze responding to Beck's question, "What would the ultimate record that ever could possibly be made sound like?"[23]
  * Eggers contributed lyrics to the song "The Ghost of Rita Gonzolo" on One Ring Zero's 2004 album As Smart as We Are.

## [edit] Bibliography

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Dave
Eggers  
### [edit] Nonfiction

  * A Heartbreaking Work of Staggering Genius (2000)
  * Teachers Have It Easy: The Big Sacrifices and Small Salaries of America's Teachers (co-authored with Daniel Moulthrop and NÃ­nive Clements Calegari) (2005)
  * Surviving Justice: America's Wrongfully Convicted and Exonerated (co-compiled with Lola Vollen; with an introduction by Scott Turow) (2005)

### [edit] Fiction

  * You Shall Know Our Velocity (novel) (2002)
  * Sacrament (novel, revised and expanded version of You Shall Know Our Velocity) (2003)
  * The Unforbidden is Compulsory; or, Optimism (story) (2004)
  * How We Are Hungry (short stories) (2004)
  * Short Short Stories (short stories, part of the Pocket Penguin series) (2005)
  * What Is the What: The Autobiography of Valentino Achak Deng (novel) (2006)
  * How the Water Feels to the Fishes (short stories; part of One Hundred and Forty-Five Stories in a Small Box) (2007)
  * The Wild Things (working title) (novel inspired by Where the Wild Things Are, to be released alongside the film) (2009)

### [edit] Humor books

  * Giraffes? Giraffes! (as Dr. and Mr. Doris Haggis-On-Whey, co-authored with Christopher Eggers) (2003)
  * Your Disgusting Head (as Dr. and Mr. Doris Haggis-On-Whey, co-authored with Christopher Eggers) (2004)
  * Animals of the Ocean, in Particular the Giant Squid (as Dr. and Mr. Doris Haggis-On-Whey, co-authored with Christopher Eggers) (2006)

### [edit] Other

  * Jokes Told in Heaven About Babies (as Lucy Thomas) (2003)
  * Salon.com serials: "The Unforbidden Is Compulsory Or, Optimism", "The Fishmonger Returns", and "New Hampshire Is for Lovers" (2004)
  * Screenplay adaptation of the children's book Where the Wild Things Are
  * Screenplay for Away We Go, cowritten with wife Vendela Vida

### [edit] As editor or contributor (non-McSweeney's publications)

  * Speaking with the Angel: Original Stories, edited by Nick Hornby (contributor) (2000)
  * The Onion Ad Nauseam: The Complete News Archives, Volume 13 (introduction) (2002)
  * The O. Henry Prize Stories 2002 (selected by, with Joyce Carol Oates and Colson Whitehead) (2002)
  * The Best American Nonrequired Reading 2002 (editor, with Michael Cart) (2002)
  * The Tenants of Moonbloom, by Edward Lewis Wallant (reissue of Wallant's 1963 novel) (Introduction) (2003)
  * The Best American Nonrequired Reading 2003 (editor; introduction by Zadie Smith) (2003)
  * Happy Baby by Stephen Elliott (editor; designed by McSweeney's and published and distributed by MacAcam/Cage) (2004)
  * The Best American Nonrequired Reading 2004 (editor; introduction by Viggo Mortensen) (2004)
  * The Best American Nonrequired Reading 2005 (editor; introduction by Beck) (2005)
  * Penguin Classics edition of Forty Stories by Donald Barthelme (introduction) (2005)
  * The Thinking Fan's Guide to the World Cup, edited by Matt Weiland and Sean Wilsey (contributor) (2006)
  * The Best American Nonrequired Reading 2006 (editor; introduction by Matt Groening) (2006)
  * Infinite Jest (introduction to 10th anniversary edition) (2006)
  * John Currin (contributor; additional text by John Currin, Norman Bryson, and Alison Gingeras) (2006)
  * The Best American Nonrequired Reading 2007 (editor; introduction by Sufjan Stevens) (2007)
  * The Best American Nonrequired Reading 2008 (editor; introduction by Judy Blume) (2008)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ ""FoE! Log #2:Dave Eggers, Vince Vaughn and Me"". My Manifesto, by Gary Baum. 2000-03-06. http://www.aphrodigitaliac.com/mm/archive/2000/03/06/. Retrieved on 2007-02-21.
  2. ^ ""Four prize-winning authors taking part in U. of I. series that begins Feb. 8" by Andrea Lynn". News Bureau, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 2007-01-23. http://www.news.uiuc.edu/news/07/0123authors.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-16.
  3. ^ ""Vendela Vida floats amid S.F. literati but keeps feet, attitude firmly planted" by Joshunda Sanders". San Francisco Chronicle. 2003-08-27. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2003/08/27/DD126631.DTL. Retrieved on 2007-02-22.
  4. ^ ""Different worlds: The many livesânovelist, social activist, literary innovator, teacherâof Dave Eggers" by Susan Larson". The Times-Picayune [New Orleans]. 2007-02-06. http://www.nola.com/printer/printer.ssf?/base/living-0/117074735842110.xml&coll=1. Retrieved on 2007-02-22.
  5. ^ "William D. Eggers". Manhattan Institute for Policy Research. undated. http://www.manhattan-institute.org/html/eggers.htm. Retrieved on 2007-02-19.
  6. ^ ""FoE! Log #6: The Beth Eggers Exclusive (And Some Other Stuff)"". My Manifesto, by Gary Baum. April 17, 2000. http://www.aphrodigitaliac.com/mm/archive/2000/04/17/. Retrieved on 2007-02-19.
  7. ^ ""FoE! Log #13: A Very Special Edition of The FoE! Log"". My Manifesto, by Gary Baum. July 31, 2000. http://www.aphrodigitaliac.com/mm/archive/2000/07/31/. Retrieved on 2007-11-16. Note: The original page to which this source refers has since been removed from McSweeney's Internet Tendency.
  8. ^ ""More Heartbreak for Author" by Richard Johnson, with Paula Froelich and Chris Wilson". PageSix.com (New York Post online edition) at iWon. February 28, 2002. http://209.85.173.104/search?q=cache:NALYiivf9AEJ:page6.com/story/more%2Bheartbreak%2Bauthor+%22More+Heartbreak+for+Author%22&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=1&gl=us. Retrieved on 2008-04-02. (Google cache)
  9. ^ ""Readers Interview Dave Eggers"". McSweeney's Internet Tendency. [2002]. http://www.mcsweeneys.net/links/interview/readers_de.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-19.
  10. ^ ""TED Blog: Announcing 2008 TED Prize Winners"". [2007]. http://blog.ted.com/2007/11/announcing_2008.php. Retrieved on 2007-11-21.
  11. ^ "Talks Dave Eggers: 2008 TED Prize wish: Once Upon a School" (video). TED Conference Website. http://www.ted.com/talks/view/id/233. Retrieved on 2008-03-19.
  12. ^ "TEDPrize 2008 Winner :: Dave Eggers". TED Prize Website. http://www.tedprize.org/?page_id=7. Retrieved on 2008-03-19.
  13. ^ ""Growing Up in Public: David Eggers and Ann Powers" by Mark Athitakis". SF Weekly. 2000-03-08. http://www.sfweekly.com/2000-03-08/culture/growing-up-in-public/full. Retrieved on 2007-02-21.
  14. ^ ""Introducing (again) Dave Eggers"". Salon.com. [2004]. http://archive.salon.com/books/eggers/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-21.
  15. ^ ""Surviving Justice: About the Editors"". Voice of Witness. undated. http://www.voiceofwitness.com/abouted.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-20.
  16. ^ ""NBCC Awards Finalists"". The National Book Critics Circle, bookcritics.org. undated. http://www.bookcritics.org/?go=finalists. Retrieved on 2007-03-11.
  17. ^ ""826 Chapters"". 826 National. undated. http://www.826national.org/chapters/. Retrieved on 2007-02-20.
  18. ^ ""Revenge of the BookâEaters"". Bookeaters.org. 2006. http://www.bookeaters.org/. Retrieved on 2007-02-20.
  19. ^ The Heinz Awards, Dave Eggers profile
  20. ^ "" 'We never feel any sort of ownership' " by John Freeman". Guardian Unlimited. 14 September 2007. http://books.guardian.co.uk/interviews/story/0,,2169276,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-15. An interview to Eggers
  21. ^ ""Making It Up as We Go Along"". ESPN the Magazine. 11 March 2008. http://sports.espn.go.com/espnmag/story?id=3288256. Retrieved on 2008-09-29.
  22. ^ Vheissu (liner notes), Island Records, 2005.
  23. ^ "" 'I'm always in danger of being dismissed as a clown' " by Chris Salmon". Guardian Unlimited. 2006-09-21. http://arts.guardian.co.uk/features/story/0,,1877277,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-21.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Dave Eggers  
  * Author page on the McSweeney's website (features a detailed bibliography)
  * Radio Interview on Bookworm, February 1, 2007
  * Interview about 826 National on Public School Insights, Posted May 20, 2008
  * TED Prize Wish: Dave Eggers makes his TED Prize wish: Once Upon a School at TED in 2008

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dave_Eggers"

Categories: 1970 births | American agnostics | American book editors |
American book publishers (people) | American humorists | American magazine
editors | American magazine publishers (people) | American memoirists |
American novelists | American online publication editors | American short
story writers | Writers from California | Living people | McSweeney's |
Writers from New York | People from Brooklyn | People from Chicago, Illinois |
People from San Francisco, California | Writers from Chicago, Illinois |
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign alumni | TED Prize winners

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 14:14 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



