
# Music Production Center

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

An AKAI MPC2000 sampler

Akai MPCs (originally MIDI Production Center, now Music Production Center) are
a popular and well respected series of electronic musical instruments
originally designed by Roger Linn and produced by the Japanese company Akai
from 1988 onwards. Intended to function as a powerful kind of drum machine,
the MPCs drew on design ideas from machines such as the Sequential Circuits
Inc. Studio 440 and the Linn's own Linn 9000, combining a powerful MIDI
sequencer with the ability to sample one's own sounds. Later models feature
increasingly powerful sampling, storage, interfacing and sound manipulation
facilities, which broaden the use of instrument beyond just drum and rhythm
tracks.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 MPC Models
    * 2.1 MPC60
    * 2.2 MPC3000
    * 2.3 MPC2000
    * 2.4 MPC2000XL
    * 2.5 MPC4000
    * 2.6 MPC2500
    * 2.7 MPC1000
    * 2.8 MPC500
    * 2.9 MPC5000
  * 3 Comparison
  * 4 JJ Operating System
    * 4.1 JJ OS 3.08 (free)
    * 4.2 JJ OS1
    * 4.3 JJ OS2
    * 4.4 JJ OS2XL
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links
  * 7 Notes

  
## [edit] History

The original MPC60 was designed by Roger Linn, who was hired as a design
consultant by Akai. He developed the functional design, including the panel
layout and software/hardware specifications. He then created the software with
a team of engineers. The hardware electronics were designed by English
engineer David Cockerell and his team.[1] Cockerell was a founder member of
the synthesizer firm EMS (co-creater of their famous VCS3 along with Peter
Zinovieff,[2]), and had then worked for effects manufacturers Electro-
Harmonix.

Shortly after the MPC60's release, the MPC60-II was designed. Released in
1991, the MPC60-II offered most of the same features as the MPC60, with an
added headphone output and a plastic housing replacing the original metal
one.[3] In 1994, Akai released the MPC3000, which boasted 16-bit, 44 kHz
sampling, 32-voice polyphony, and SCSI data transfer.[4] Akai developed and
released the MPC2000 without Linn in 1997.[1] It came with 2 MB of RAM, an
optional effects board, and a 100,000 note 64-track sequencer.[5] The MPC2000
was replaced by the MPC2000XL in 2000. The MPC2000XL added an improved 300,000
note sequencer, a 64-track mixer and time-stretch and resample features. Four
limited edition models of the MPC2000XL were released.[5]

In 2002 Akai unveiled the MPC4000, the most powerful MPC at the time. The
MPC4000 featured 8 assignable outputs, a hard drive and CD-ROM drive. The
MPC4000's memory could be expanded to up to 512 MB of RAM, the largest amount
on an MPC to date.[6] Only two years after the release of the MPC4000, Akai
released the MPC1000, which was the smallest in the MPC product line at the
time of its release. It was also the first MPC to utilize CompactFlash
memory.[7]. Both the MPC2500 and the MPC500 were added to the Akai MPC series
in 2006. The MPC2500 is a mid-range MPC with 8 assignable outputs and
CompactFlash storage.[8] Designed for portability, the MPC500 features 1 MIDI
In/Out and CompactFlash storage, and can be powered by 6 AA batteries.[9]

## [edit] MPC Models

The following MPC models are arranged in the order of their release date:

### [edit] MPC60

The MPC60 was a 16 voice polyphonic 12-bit 40 kHz sampler / 99 track sequencer
designed in large part by Roger Linn after Linn Electronics closed. It was
similar to the Linn 9000. Akai released it in 1988. It had 750 kB memory
standard, expandable to 1.5 MB. The sequencer is very flexible and powerful,
famous both for its "swing" setting, and its easy to use step programming. It
had 2 MIDI inputs / 4 MIDI outputs, allowing it to control up to 64 devices.
The sequencer itself was offered as a separate product, known as the ASQ10,
also released in 1988. The MPC60-II was nearly identical to the MPC60, but it
featured a headphone output, and a plastic case, instead of the metal case of
the original. It was released in 1991.

Features

  * 16 velocity sensitive pads
  * 4 pad banks (64 voices per program)
  * sampling rate of 40 kHz (freq response 20 Hz - 18 kHz)
  * 16-bit ADC and DAC, with data stored in special non-linear 12bit format (for lower noise)
  * 750 kB sampling memory (13.1 seconds), upgradable to 1.5 MB (26.2 seconds) (expansion card: EXM003)
  * 128 sounds in memory, 64 sounds per program, 16 voice polyphony.
  * 2 MIDI inputs, 4 MIDI outputs
  * 20 songs, 99 sequences, 99 tracks, 60,000 note capacity
  * timing resolution of 96ppq (parts per quarter note)
  * syncable via MIDI Time Code (MTC), MIDI Clock, FSK24, SMPTE, 1/4 note click.
  * SMPTE supported frame rates: 24, 25, 29.97 drop, and 30.
  * 8 assignable outputs + 1 stereo + 1 effects send/return
  * Internal 3Â½" floppy drive (Double Density 720 kB)
  * optional 3rd=party SCSI interface (by Marion Systems)[3]

### [edit] MPC3000

The MPC3000 improved upon the MPC60 by adding 16-bit 44.1 kHz stereo sampling,
increased memory, 32 voice polyphony, effects, filters, and SCSI. It was
released by Akai in 1994. The MPC3000LE (Limited Edition) is identical to the
MPC3000, except for its black custom design. It was released by Akai in 2000
and limited to 2000 units.[4]

Features

  * 16 velocity sensitive pads

4 pad banks (64 voices per program)

  * sampling rate of 16-bit 44.1 kHz stereo (freq response 20 Hz - 22.1 kHz)
  * 2 MB sampling memory (22 seconds), upgradable to 32 MB (officially stated as 16 MB) (6 minutes)
  * 32 voice polyphony.
  * 2 MIDI inputs, 4 MIDI outputs
  * 20 songs, 99 sequences, 99 tracks, 75,000 note capacity
  * timing resolution of 96ppq (parts per quarter note)
  * syncable via MIDI Time Code, MIDI Clock, FSK24, SMPTE, 1/4 note click.
  * SMPTE supported frame rates: 24, 25, 29.97 drop, and 30.
  * 8 assignable outputs + 1 stereo + 1 effects send/return
  * Internal 3Â½" floppy drive
  * SCSI[4]

### [edit] MPC2000

The MPC2000 is a 64-track sampler/sequencer introduced in 1997 and
discontinued in 2000. It comes with 2 MB sample memory as standard, and can be
expanded to 32 MB. It supports a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz, in 16 bit stereo
or mono.

Features

  * 16 velocity sensitive pads
  * Internal 3Â½" floppy drive
  * 4 pad banks
  * 2 MIDI inputs, 2 MIDI outputs
  * 100,000 note capacity 64-track sequencer
  * 2 MB sampling memory (upgradable to 32 MB)
  * Optional effects board (EB16)
  * Optional 8 outputs and digital I/O board (IB-M208)
  * SCSI interface[5]

### [edit] MPC2000XL

<IMG>

<IMG>

MPC2000XL SE 2

The MPC2000XL is similar to the MPC2000 but with added features; including
four pad-bank keys, time stretch along with other new features. In 2004 the
2000XL-MCD version was released, which features a CompactFlash card reader as
standard in place of the floppy drive or Zip drives used in earlier
models.[10] There were 4 limited edition 2000XL SE MPCs created between 2000
and 2003. There were two versions of the SE 1, one with an improved control
surface, compatible with growing number of sound libraries and one with
aesthetic changes. The Limited Edition SE 2 and SE 3 also had only aesthetic
changes.[11] The 4 SE models can be seen here: http://www.loopers-
delight.com/tools/akai/MPC2000/MPC2000.html.

Features

  * 16 velocity sensitive pads
  * Internal 3Â½" floppy drive or 100 MB Zip drive (upgradeable to an MCD card reader)
  * 4 Pad Bank keys
  * Adjustable angle screen
  * Time stretch
  * 2 MIDI inputs, 2 MIDI outputs
  * Note-repeat key
  * 300,000 note capacity 64-track sequencer
  * 2 MB sampling memory (upgradable to 32 MB)
  * Optional effects board (EB16)
  * Optional 8 outputs and digital I/O board (IB-M208)
  * SCSI interface[5]

### [edit] MPC4000

Released in 2002, the MPC4000 was intended by Akai as a "top-of-the-range"
flagship product. Not only was it the most fully-featured MPC product yet
(building on the MPC60, 3000 and 2000XL), but it also incorporated the
sampling engine from the latest model in Akai standalone sampler range (the
Z8, building on the legacy of Akai's well-respected S-series samplers). Today
the MPC 4000 has disappeared from the AKAI Product pages, supposedly because
it was not a great sales success and is therefore replaced by the more market
orientated MPC 5000 which was released in spring 2008.

The MPC4000 gained some notoriety amongst users for having a bug-ridden OS and
poor product support, with some originally advertised product features still
not implemented in 2006.

Features

  * 16 velocity and pressure sensitive pads
  * 2 MIDI inputs, 4 MIDI outputs
  * 96 kHz 24bit sampling
  * 16 MB sampling memory, upgradeable to 512 MB
  * IDE bays for installation of internal hard disk drive and CD-ROM drive.
  * Optional plug-in boards: Effects board, ADAT board, S/P-DIF & wordclock board, 8 analogue outputs board
  * SCSI interface[6]

### [edit] MPC2500

The MPC2500 is the mid-range of the Akai line of MPCs. It has a 100,000 note,
64 track mixer with 64 assignable MIDI channels. It has 16 MB of RAM standard
and can be upgraded up to 128 MB of RAM with the AKAI EXM128 stick of RAM. It
contains an USB port for computer connectivity. It contains a CompactFlash
slot for storage of samples, and can be upgraded with a variety of hard
drives. The MPC2500 contains 2 MIDI inputs and 4 MIDI outputs. The MP2500 also
has the Chop Shop feature, which can chop a sample into as many as 64 pieces.
A CD drive can added for burning and reading capabilities. Also comes with a
128 mb compact flash card with sound kits.

Features

  * USB port (Mass Storage Class)
  * CompactFlash card reader
  * 16 velocity sensitive pads
  * 2 MIDI inputs, 4 MIDI outputs
  * 100,000 note, 64-track, MIDI sequencer
  * 16 MB sampling memory (upgradeable to 128 MB)
  * Included standard effects include:Chorus, Flanger, Bit grunger, 4 band EQ, Compressor, Phase shifter, Tremolo, Flying Pan, Reverb, and Delay.
  * It contains 8 assignable outputs and 1 stereo output.
  * It has two assignable Q-link sliders and knobs.
  * 240 x 64 hinged backlit LCD screen.
  * The CD-M25 CD Drive can added.
  * JJOS compatible[8]

### [edit] MPC1000

The MPC1000 is a 64-track sampler/sequencer. It comes with 16 MB sample memory
as standard, and can be expanded to 128 MB. It supports a sampling rate of
44.1 kHz, in stereo or mono. Its features include a USB port, an internal
CompactFlash card reader, two MIDI inputs and outputs, and effects and
multiple analog outputs as standard. Its sequencer's resolution is 96 ppq.

There have been wide spread problems with the pad sensors in the 1000. In the
original MPC1000 sensors, a thin square of carbon-impregnated rubber is
attached above a copper coil. When a pad is depressed, this carbon-impregnated
rubber is compressed against the copper coil, allowing current to pass
through.

In 2007, Akai offered a pad upgrade to add improved performance, retailing at
180 USD. The pad sensors design returned to the design of the pad sensors in
previous models. This upgrade has been seen to be pre-installed on the
MPC1000BK-N and some versions of the MPC1000BK, not the MPC1000 (blue outer
casing). Before this pad problem was eventually fixed by Akai, a MPC 1000 user
designed, built and sold kits of a pad fix under the name "Nym." Nym's kit is
no longer available. By comparison, the more recent Akai pad fix uses better
sensor technology (Sensitronic FSRs).[12]

  
Features

  * USB port (Mass Storage Class)
  * CompactFlash card reader
  * 16 velocity sensitive pads
  * 4 pad bank keys
  * 2 MIDI inputs, 2 MIDI outputs
  * 100,000 note capacity 64-track sequencer
  * 16 MB sampling memory (upgradeable to 128 MB)
  * Effects as standard
  * Multiple analog outputs as standard
  * Timestretch and pitch shift (added in OS 2.0)
  * JJOS compatible[7]

### [edit] MPC500

The MPC500 is the smallest MPC ever made and is the first truly portable MPC
created. It can be run on 6 AA batteries but also can be run on a 12V DC plug.
It combines a 48-track MIDI sequencer and a 32-voice stereo digital sampler.
The MPC500 is the first MPC that only has 12 velocity sensitive rubber pads.
It comes with 16 MB RAM but can be upgraded up to 128 MB of RAM. It has a
CompactFlash slot for storage of samples. One major appeal of the MPC500 is
the fact that you can take a project created on the MPC500 and transfer it to
any current MPC with a CompactFlash reader. The MPC500 has a USB port for
computer connectivity. It has one stereo output, making it the only MPC
currently in production that does not have assignable outputs.

Features

  * USB port (Mass Storage Class)
  * CompactFlash card reader
  * 12 velocity sensitive rubber pads
  * Stereo L+R in & out
  * 1 MIDI in and 1 MIDI out
  * 4 pad banks
  * 2 x 16 character LCD screen with back light
  * Standard effects include:Chorus, Flanger, Bit grunger, 4 band EQ, Compressor, Phase shifter, Tremolo, Flying pan, Reverb, and Delay.
  * Approximately 4.5 hours of continuous use with LCD backlight on.
  * 465.5 sq CM footprint.[9]

### [edit] MPC5000

The MPC5000 was launched at the 2008 winter NAMM trade show. Its main
innovations are an 8-track streaming hard disk recorder, a 20-voice,
3-oscillator virtual analog synthesizer with arpeggiator, a new sequencing
engine with 960 ppq resolution, pad and track muting and mixing, 64 continuous
sample tracks. It also has a new FX engine with 4 FX buses and 2FX per bus,
and is considered by Akai to be its flagship MPC[13].

In addition, the MPC5000 features a 64-voice drum/phrase sampler with 64MB
memory, expandable up to 192MB. The display is 240x128, twice the size of the
MPC2500 and MPC1000, but smaller than the one on the MPC 4000 . Integrated
Chop Shop 2.0 now supports stereo chops and Patched Phrases. It is also the
first MPC to include Random and Cycle sample playback in addition to velocity
Zone Play. A turntable preamp is also included, as on the MPC 4000.

Although being marketed as "the ultimate MPC", the MPC 5000 lacks some of the
advanced sample editing capabilities of the older MPC 4000. Also, some of its
hardware specs are lower (max. 192 MB RAM vs. the 4000's 512 MB, smaller
screen), despite the falling prices of hardware since the 4000's 2002 launch.
The numbers-to-numbers comparison of specifications has resulted in some
unfavorable comparisons on the MPC community forums.

## [edit] Comparison

The following table offers a side-by-side comparison of a variety of
statistics across the MPC product-line. The specs for the MPC 1000 and 2500
refer to the original AKAI operating system, unless mentioned otherwise.

Model Release Date Price MIDI Inputs/Outputs Audio Outputs Sampling Rate
Sampling Memory/Upgrade-able Sampling Time Storage Method Pad Banks Note
Capacity Extra Features  
MPC60 1988 $5,000[14] 2 in, 4 out 8 + L/R 12-bit 40 kHz 750 kB / 1.5 MB (13.1
sec) / (26.2 sec) Internal 3Â½" floppy drive 4 60,000  
MPC60 MK2 1991 $5,000[14] 2 in, 4 out 8 + L/R 12-bit 40 kHz 750 kB / 1.5 MB
(13.1 sec) / (26.2 sec) Internal 3Â½" floppy drive 4 60,000 Headphone jack,
Plastic case  
MPC3000 1993 $3,500[14] 2 in, 4 out 8 + L/R 16-bit 44.1 kHz 2 MB / 32 MB (22
sec) / (6 min) Internal 3Â½" floppy drive 4 75,000 -LE in 2000 with black case  
MPC2000 1997 $2,000[14] 2 in, 2 out L/R + 8 (optional) 22 or 44.1 kHz 2 MB /
32 MB SCSI Interface 4 100,000  
MPC2000XL 2000 $1,100[15] 2 in, 2 out L/R + 8 (optional) 22 or 44.1 kHz 2 MB/
32 MB 6min mono/3min stereo Floppy/Zip Drive/CompactFlash 4 300,000 -MCD with
Compact Flash  
MPC4000 2002 $2,800[16] 2 in, 4 out L/R + 8 (optional) 96, 48 or 44.1 kHz, 16
or 24 bit 16 MB / 512 MB 96min / 64min (16/24 bit) Hard Drive/CD-ROM 6 300,000
IDE Bays  
MPC1000 2005 $1,000[17] 2 in, 2 out 4 + L/R 44.1 kHz 16 MB / 128 MB 136 sec /
24m28sec CompactFlash/Hard Drive 4 100,000 / 300,000 (With JJ OS Ver. 4.9 or
OS2 Ver. 0.x,1.x) optional HDD  
MPC500 2006 $700[18] 1 in, 1 out L/R 44.1 kHz 16 MB / 128 MB 136 sec /
24m28sec CompactFlash 4 100,000 Smallest MPC

Portable/Can run on 6 AA Batteries  
MPC2500 2007 $2,000[19] 2 in, 4 out 8 + L/R 44.1 kHz 16 MB / 128 MB 136 sec /
24m28sec CompactFlash/CD-Rom/DVD-Rom/Hard Drive 4 100,000 built in 10 analog
outs, optional CD drive, optional HDD  
MPC5000 2008 $2,500[20] 2 in, 4 out 8 + L/R 44.1 kHz 64 MB / 192 MB
12m48s/38m24s CompactFlash/CD-Rom/DVD-Rom/Hard Drive 4 100,000 VA Synth, 8
track direct-to-drive recording, 4 FX busses, Hard disk streaming of samples  
## [edit] JJ Operating System

In the summer of 2006, an anonymous programmer believed to be an ex-Akai
employee released a 3rd party OS for the MPC 1000 and later for the MPC 2500.
This programmer was nicknamed "JJ" or "Japanese Jenius" by an enthusiastic
fan/beta tester.

This new software boasts superior features to those of the original OS and
also fixes a number of bugs in the Akai software.[21]. Collective additions
include "midi grid edit" (piano roll), extensive qlink support, audio tracks,
aftertouch, portamento, and innumerable performance and system tweaks. The
demo version lacks a save capability, which is unlocked with the purchase of a
password for $50.

As a programmer, JJ is characterized by his frequent updates and attentiveness
to customer feedback. Despite a significant language barrier (Japanese-
English) JJ OS users maintain a steady stream of dialog with the programmer.
This steady flow of dialog between the user and the programmer is further
maintained through the ability to report a bug in the system directly to JJ
through the "Report a Bug" link on the JJ OS website.

In late December, 2007, JJ released a beta version of OS 2, which has since
gone gold. This version gives the 1000 and 2500 features[22] found on the more
expensive MPC 4000, such as ADSR for pitch, amp and filter, keymaps etc. On
March 11th, 2008, The 1.0 version of OS2 was released, adding more sound
editing possibilities, including: fade in and out, and combine of two sounds.
It also added audio track improvements, which mainly focused around the
ability to apply pads to markers with in an audio track. These are just some
examples of improvements made in the 1.0 version. [23]

There is an extended community of users of all of the versions of the JJ
operating system on mpc-forums.com (MPC 1000 and MPC 2500)

There are three different versions of the JJ OS available for download.

### [edit] JJ OS 3.08 (free)

This version is the most similar to the Akai OS, and does not include many new
features, however it has fixed a series of bugs.

### [edit] JJ OS1

A version of "OS1" which is the most stable version of the all of the JJ OS's.
The user must purchase a password for $30.00 US dollars (or $40 for the MPC
2500). OS1 is currently in version 4.99B. The most recent MPC 2500 version
(10.16.2008) is 5.55.

Features

  * LED Screen
  * Velocity Trigger Qlinks
  * Effects Modulation
  * Insert Silence
  * Increased Sound Editing through TRIM mode
  * MIDI Time Clock (MTC) and MIDI Machine Control (MMC)
  * MIDI, 6 and 16 pad DRAM, Q-Link, and audio Grid Edit
  * Simult Sequence
  * Recordable Track Mutes [24]

### [edit] JJ OS2

The second version of the JJ OS is OS2, which was released in beta form in
late December 2007. Many of these features that have been added by OS2 have
been compared to features included in the high-end MPC 4000. Like OS1, it can
be downloaded and tried free of charge, but users are unable to save. This can
be unlocked by purchasing a password for OS2, however, users are unable to
install OS2 unless they already have installed an unlocked version of OS1
first. On March 11th 2008 version 1.0 was released[23], and as of 04.08.2008,
the JJOS2 is available for both the MPC1000(v1.06) and the MPC2500(v1.04),
with both costing $49.

Features

  * Filter, Amp, and Pitch ADSR envelopes
  * Aftertouch
  * Multi-sample instrument programs including portamento
  * Sample Layer Crossfade
  * Non-destructive Chop
  * Track Mixer
  * Pad Pattern
  * Fade in and out
  * Grid Edit Loop Edit
  * Improved audio tracks including audio markers and start offset [24]

### [edit] JJ OS2XL

The latest version of the JJ OS was released January 27, 2009. 66 new
functions have been added.

## [edit] See also

  * Akai
  * Drum Machine
  * Groovebox

## [edit] External links

  * AkaiPro.com
  * BeatCreators.com What is an MPC?
  * Roger Linn Design New Version 3.10 software upgrade and Marion Systems SCSI hard disk interface kit for MPC60 I & II
  * JJOS JJ OS for the MPC1000
  * JJOS JJ OS for the MPC2500

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b "Industry Interview -Roger Linn". 2007. http://www.sonicstate.com/articles/article.cfm?id=71&page=3. Retrieved on 2007-07-04.
  2. ^ "The EMS History". 2007. http://www.ems-synthi.demon.co.uk/emsstory.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-08.
  3. ^ a b "Akai MPC-60". 2007. http://www.vintagesynth.com/akai/mpc60.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  4. ^ a b c "AKAI MPC-3000". 2007. http://www.vintagesynth.com/index2.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  5. ^ a b c d "AKAI MPC-2000 / MPC-2000XL". 2007. http://www.vintagesynth.com/index2.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  6. ^ a b "Akai MPC4000 Plus". 2007. http://akaipro.com/prodMPC4000.php. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  7. ^ a b "MPC 1000: The Power of an MPC with the Portability of a Laptop". 2007. http://akaipro.com/prodMPC1000.php. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  8. ^ a b "MPC 2500: Ultimate Production Power". 2007. http://akaipro.com/prodMPC2500.php. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  9. ^ a b [http://akaipro.com/prodMPC500.php "MPC500 Production, Power and Next Level Portability"]. 2007. http://akaipro.com/prodMPC500.php. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  10. ^ "MPC2000XL-MCD". 2007. http://akaipro.com/prodMPC2000XLMCD.php. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  11. ^ "Akai MPC-2000 MIDI Production Center(XL, SE-1, SE-2, SE-3, XL with Zip)". 2007. http://www.loopers-delight.com/tools/akai/MPC2000/MPC2000.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  12. ^ "The Pad Fix". 2007. http://nymantics.com/thepadfix/. Retrieved on 2008-03-13.
  13. ^ Search
  14. ^ a b c d "Akai MPC 1000 REVIEW". 2007. http://www.onestopbeats.com/mpc1000review.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  15. ^ "Akai MPC2000XL-MCD Production Station". 2007. http://www.musiciansfriend.com/product/Akai-MPC2000XLMCD-Production-Station?sku=705619. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  16. ^ "Akai MPC4000 Plus Production Station with CDRW". 2007. http://www.musiciansfriend.com/product/Akai-MPC4000-Plus-Production-Station-with-CDRW?sku=705607. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  17. ^ "Akai MPC1000 Music Production Center". 2007. http://www.musiciansfriend.com/product/Akai-MPC1000-Sequencer-Sampler?sku=705623. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  18. ^ "Akai MPC500 Portable Music Production Center". 2007. http://www.musiciansfriend.com/product/Akai-Portable-Voice-Sampling-Sequencer-?sku=700344. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  19. ^ "Akai MPC2500 Music Production Center". 2007. http://www.musiciansfriend.com/product/Akai-MPC2500-Music-Production-Center?sku=705621. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  20. ^ "Akai MPC 5000 Music Production Center". 2008. http://www.samash.com/catalog/showitem.asp?itemid=69031&sourcetype=singleitemsearch. Retrieved on 2008-02-12.
  21. ^ "Manual for JJ OS1 for MPC 1000". 2008. http://www7a.biglobe.ne.jp/~mpc1000/manual_e.htm. Retrieved on 2008-02-12.
  22. ^ "JJ OS 2 for MPC 2500 features". 2008. http://www7a.biglobe.ne.jp/~mpc1000/mpc2500/os2/. Retrieved on 2008-02-12.
  23. ^ a b "Bug Fixes". 2008. http://www7a.biglobe.ne.jp/~mpc1000/bug/. Retrieved on 2008-03-12.
  24. ^ a b "JJ OS Comparison Chart". 2008. http://www7a.biglobe.ne.jp/~mpc1000/chart.htm. Retrieved on 2008-03-13.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Music_Production_Center"

Categories: Akai synthesizers | Samplers | Sequencers | Sound modules |
Workstations

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 10 April 2009, at 14:00 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



