
# Surveillance

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the 2008 film, see Surveillance (2008 film).

<IMG>

<IMG>

A 'nest' of surveillance cameras at the Gillette Stadium in Foxborough,
Massachusetts

Surveillance, pronounced pronounced /sÉËveÉªÉns/ or /sÉËveÉªlÉns/[1], is
the monitoring of the behavior of a person or group of people, often in a
surreptitious manner. Although the word surveillance in French literally means
"watching over",[2] the term is often used for all forms of observation or
monitoring, not just visual observation.

The word surveillance is commonly used to describe observation from a distance
by means of electronic equipment (such as CCTV cameras), or interception of
electronically transmitted information (such as Internet traffic or phone
calls). However, surveillance can also refer to simple, relatively no- or low-
technology methods such as human intelligence agents and postal interception.

Surveillance is very useful to governments and law enforcement to maintain
social control, recognize and monitor threats, and prevent/investigate
criminal activity. With the advent of programs such as the Total Information
Awareness program and ADVISE, technologies such as high speed surveillance
computers and biometrics software, and laws such as the Communications
Assistance For Law Enforcement Act, governments now possess an unprecedented
ability to monitor the activities of their subjects.[3]

However, many civil rights and privacy groups such as the Electronic Frontier
Foundation and ACLU have expressed concern that by allowing continual
increases in government surveillance of citizens that we will end up in a mass
surveillance society, with extremely limited, or non-existent political and/or
personal freedoms. Fears such as this have lead to numerous lawsuits such as
Hepting v. AT&T.[3][4]

## Contents

  * 1 Types of surveillance
    * 1.1 Computer surveillance
    * 1.2 Telephones and mobile telephones
    * 1.3 Surveillance cameras
    * 1.4 Social Network Analysis
    * 1.5 Biometric surveillance
    * 1.6 Aerial surveillance
    * 1.7 Data mining & profiling
    * 1.8 Corporate Surveillance
    * 1.9 Human operatives
    * 1.10 Satellite Imagery
    * 1.11 Identification & Credentials
    * 1.12 RFID & Geolocation Devices
      * 1.12.1 RFID tagging
      * 1.12.2 Global Positioning Systems (GPS)
      * 1.12.3 Mobile phones
    * 1.13 Surveillance devices, or "bugs"
    * 1.14 Postal services
  * 2 Controversy surrounding surveillance
    * 2.1 Supporting surveillance
    * 2.2 Opposing surveillance
      * 2.2.1 Totalitarianism
      * 2.2.2 Privacy
  * 3 Countersurveillance, inverse surveillance, sousveillance
  * 4 Surveillance in popular culture
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 Further reading
  * 8 External links
    * 8.1 General Information on Surveillance
    * 8.2 Historical Information
    * 8.3 Legal Resources

  
## [edit] Types of surveillance

### [edit] Computer surveillance

<IMG>

<IMG>

Official seal of the Information Awareness Office \-- a U.S. agency which
developed technologies for mass surveillance

The vast majority of computer surveillance involves the monitoring of data and
traffic on the Internet.[5] In the United States for example, under the
Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act, all phone calls and
broadband internet traffic (emails, web traffic, instant messaging, etc) are
required to be available for unimpeded real-time monitoring by Federal law
enforcement agencies.[6][7][8]

There is far too much data on the internet for human investigators to manually
search through all of it. So automated Internet surveillance computers sift
through the vast amount of intercepted internet traffic, and filter out and
report to human investigators those bits of information which are
"interesting" -- such as the use of certain words or phrases, visiting certain
types of web sites, or communicating via email or chat with a certain
individual or group.[9] Billions of dollars per year are spent, by agencies
such as the Information Awareness Office, NSA, and the FBI, to develop,
purchase, implement, and operate systems such as Carnivore, NarusInsight, and
ECHELON to intercept and analyze all of this data, and extract only the
information which is useful to law enforcement and intelligence agencies. [10]

Computers are also a surveillance target because of the personal data stored
on them. If someone is able to install software (either physically or
remotely), such as the FBI's "Magic Lantern" and CIPAV, on a computer system,
they can easily gain unauthorized access to this data. [11]

Another form of computer surveillance, known as TEMPEST, involves reading
electromagnetic emanations from computing devices in order to extract data
from them at distances of hundreds of meters.[12][13][14]

### [edit] Telephones and mobile telephones

The official and unofficial tapping of telephone lines is widespread. In the
United States for instance, the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement
Act (CALEA) requires that all telephone and VoIP communications be available
for real-time wiretapping by Federal law enforcement and intelligence
agencies. [6][7][8] Two major telecommunications companies in the U.S. -- AT&T
and Verizon -- have contracts with the FBI, requiring them to keep their phone
call records easily searchable and accessible for Federal agencies, in return
for $1.8 million dollars per year.[15] Between 2003 and 2005, the FBI sent out
more than 140,000 "National Security Letters" ordering phone companies to hand
over information about their customers' calling and internet histories. About
half of these letters requested information on U.S. citizens.[16]

Human agents are not required to monitor most calls. Speech-to-text software
creates machine-readable text from intercepted audio, which is then processed
by automated call-analysis programs, such as those developed by agencies such
as the Information Awareness Office, or companies such as Verint, and Narus,
which search for certain words or phrases, to decide whether to dedicate a
human agent to the call.[17]

Law enforcement and intelligence services in the U.K. and the United States
possess technology to remotely activate the microphones in cell phones, by
accessing the phone's diagnostic/maintenance features, in order to listen to
conversations that take place nearby the person who holds the
phone.[18][19][20]

Mobile phones are also commonly used to collect location data. The
geographical location of a mobile phone (and thus the person carrying it) can
be determined easily (whether it is being used or not), using a technique
known multilateration to calculate the differences in time for a signal to
travel from the cell phone to each of several cell towers near the owner of
the phone. [21][22] A controversy has emerged in the United States over the
legality of such techniques, and particularly whether a court warrant is
required.[23]

### [edit] Surveillance cameras

Main article: Closed-circuit television

<IMG>

<IMG>

Citizens under surveillance in Cairns, Queensland

Surveillance cameras are video cameras used for the purpose of observing an
area. They are often connected to a recording device, IP network, and/or
watched by a security guard/law enforcement officer. Cameras and recording
equipment used to be relatively expensive and required human personnel to
monitor camera footage. Now with cheaper production techniques, it is simple
and inexpensive enough to be used in home security systems, and for everyday
surveillance. Analysis of footage is made easier by automated software that
organizes digital video footage into a searchable database, and by automated
video analysis software (such as VIRAT or HumanID . The amount of footage is
drastically reduced by motion sensors which only record when motion is
detected.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Surveillance cameras such as these are installed by the millions in many
countries, and are nowadays monitored by automated computer programs instead
of humans.

The use of surveillance cameras by governments and businesses has dramatically
increased over the last 10 years. In the U.K., for example, there are about
4.2 million surveillance cameras -- 1 camera for every 14 people.[24]

In the United States, the Department of Homeland Security gives billions of
dollars per year in Homeland Security grants for local, state, and federal
agencies to install modern video surveillance equipment. For example, the city
of Chicago, IL recently used a $5.1 million Homeland Security grant to install
an additional 250 surveillance cameras, and connect them to a centralized
monitoring center, along with its preexisting network of over 2000 cameras in
a program known as Operation Virtual Shield. Chicago Mayor Richard Daley
stated that Chicago will have a surveillance camera on every street corner by
the year 2016. [25][26]

As part of China's Golden Shield Project, several U.S. corporations such as
IBM, General Electric, and Honeywell have been working closely with the
Chinese government to install millions of surveillance cameras throughout
China, along with advanced video analysis and facial recognition software,
which will identify and track individuals everywhere they go. They will be
connected to a centralized database and monitoring station, which will, upon
completion of the project, contain a picture of the face of every person in
China: over 1.3 billion people.[27] Lin Jiang Huai, the head of China's
"Information Security Technology" office (which is in charge of the project),
credits the surveillance systems in the United States and the U.K. as the
inspiration for what he is doing with the Golden Shield project.[27]

The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is funding a research
project called Combat Zones That See that will link up cameras across a city
to a centralized monitoring station, identify and track individuals and
vehicles as they move through the city, and report "suspicious" activity (such
as waving arms, looking side-to-side, standing in a group, etc).[28]

At Super Bowl XXXV in January 2001, police in Tampa Bay, Florida, used
Identixâs facial recognition software, FaceIt, to scan the crowd for
potential criminals and terrorists in attendance at the event.[29] (it found
19 people with pending arrest warrants)[30]

Governments often initially claim that cameras are meant to be used for
traffic control, but many of them end up using them for general surveillance.
For example, Washington, D.C. had 5000 "traffic" cameras installed under this
premise, and then after they were all in place, networked them all together
and then granted access to the Metropolitan Police Department, so that they
could perform "day-to-day monitoring".[31]

The development of centralized networks of CCTV cameras watching public areas
-- linked to computer databases of people's pictures and identity (biometric
data), able to track peoples' movements throughout the city, and identify who
they have been with -- has been argued by some to present a risk to civil
liberties.[32]

### [edit] Social Network Analysis

One common form of surveillance is to create maps of social networks based on
data from social networking sites such as Facebook, MySpace, Twitter as well
as from traffic analysis information from phone call records such as those in
the NSA call database[33], and others. These social network "maps" are then
data mined to extract useful information such as personal interests,
friendships & affiliations, wants, beliefs, thoughts, and
activities.[34][35][36]

Many U.S. government agencies such as the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA), the National Security Agency (NSA), and the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) are currently investing heavily in research involving
social network analysis.[37][38] The intelligence community believes that the
biggest threat to U.S. power comes from decentralized, leaderless,
geographically disbursed groups of terrorists, subversives, and extremists.
These types of threats are most easily countered by finding important nodes in
the network, and removing them. To do this requires a detailed map of the
network.[36][39]

Jason Ethier of Northeastern University, in his study of modern social network
analysis, said the following of the the Scalable Social Network Analysis
Program developed by the Information Awareness Office:

> The purpose of the SSNA algorithms program is to extend techniques of social
network analysis to assist with distinguishing potential terrorist cells from
legitimate groups of people ... In order to be successful SSNA will require
information on the social interactions of the majority of people around the
globe. Since the Defense Department cannot easily distinguish between peaceful
citizens and terrorists, it will be necessary for them to gather data on
innocent civilians as well as on potential terrorists.

> âJason Ethier[36]

AT&T developed a programming language called "Hancock" which is able to sift
through enormous databases of phone call and internet traffic records, such as
the NSA call database and extract "communities of interest" -- groups of
people who call each other regularly, or groups that regularly visit certain
sites on the Internet. AT&T originally built the system to develop "marketing
leads"[40], but the FBI has regularly requested such information from phone
companies such as AT&T without a warrant,[40] and after using the data stores
all information received in its own databases, regardless of whether or not
the information was ever useful in an investigation.[41]

Some people believe that the use of social networking sites is a form of
"participatory surveillance", where users of these sites are essentially
performing surveillance on themselves, putting detailed personal information
on public websites where it can be viewed by corporations and governments.[34]
About 20% of employers have reported using social networking sites to collect
personal data on prospective or current employees.[42]

### [edit] Biometric surveillance

Main article: Biometrics

<IMG>

<IMG>

Swiss European surveillance: facial recognition device and vehicle make,
model, color and license plate reader. In Germany and Switzerland these are in
widespread use.

Biometric surveillance refers to technologies that measure and analyze human
physical and/or behavioral characteristics for authentication, identification,
or screening purposes.[43] Examples of physical characteristics include
fingerprints, DNA, and facial patterns. Examples of mostly behavioral
characteristics include gait (a person's manner of walking) or voice.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Fingerprints being scanned as part of the US-VISIT program

Facial recognition is the use of the unique configuration of a person's facial
features to accurately identify them, usually from surveillance video. Both
the Department of Homeland Security and DARPA are heavily funding research
into facial recognition systems.[44]. The Information Processing Technology
Office, ran a program known as Human Identification at a Distance which
developed technologies that are capable of identifying a person at up to 500
ft by their facial features.

Another form of behavioral biometrics, based on affective computing, involves
computers recognizing a person's emotional state based on an analysis of their
facial expressions, how fast they are talking, the tone and pitch of their
voice, their posture, and other behavioral traits. This might be used for
instance to see if a person is acting "suspicious" (looking around furtively,
"tense" or "angry" facial expressions, waving arms, etc.).[45]

A more recent development is DNA fingerprinting, which looks at some of the
major markers in the body's DNA to produce a match. The FBI is currently
spending $1 billion to build a new biometric database, which will store DNA,
facial recognition data, iris/retina (eye) data, fingerprints, palm prints,
and other biometric data of people living in the United States. The computers
running the database will be contained in an underground facility is about the
size of a football field.[46][47]

The Los Angeles Police Department is currently installing automated facial
recognition and license plate recognition devices in its squad cars, which
officers will use to identify people while on patrol.[48]

Facial thermographs are currently in development, which allow machines to
identify certain emotions in people such as fear or stress, by measuring the
temperature generated by blood flow to different parts of their face.[49] Law
enforcement officers believe that this has potential for them to identify when
a suspect is nervous, which might indicate that they are hiding something,
lying, or worried about something.[49]

### [edit] Aerial surveillance

<IMG>

<IMG>

Micro Air Vehicle with attached surveillance camera

Aerial surveillance is the gathering of surveillance, usually visual imagery
or video, from an airborne vehicle -- such as a unmanned aerial vehicle,
helicopter, or spy plane.

Digital imaging technology, miniaturized computers, and numerous other
technological advances over the past decade have contributed to rapid advances
in aerial surveillance hardware such as micro-aerial vehicles, forward-looking
infrared, and high-resolution imagery capabale of identifying objects at
extremely long distances. For instance, the MQ-9 Reaper[50], a U.S. drone
plane currently used for domestic operations by the Department of Homeland
Security, carries cameras that are capable of identifying an object the size
of a milk carton from altitudes of 60,000 feet, and has forward-looking
infrared devices that can detect the heat from a human body at distances of up
to 60 kilometers.[51]

<IMG>

<IMG>

HART program concept drawing from official IPTO (DARPA) official website

The United States Department of Homeland Security is in the process of testing
UAVs to patrol the skies over the United States for the purposes of critical
infrastructure protection, border patrol, "transit monitoring", and general
surveillance of the U.S. population.[52] Miami-Dade police department ran
tests with a vertical take-off and landing UAV from Honeywell, which is
planned to be used in SWAT operations.[53] Houston's police department has
been testing fixed-wing UAVs for use in "traffic control". [53]

The U.K., as well, is currently working on plans to build up a fleet of
surveillance UAVs ranging from micro-aerial vehicles to full-size drones, to
be used by police forces throughout the U.K.[54]

In addition to their surveillance capabilities, MAVs are capable of carrying
tasers for "crowd control", or weapons for killing enemy combatants.[55]

Programs such as the Heterogenous Aerial Reconnaissance Team program developed
by DARPA have automated much of the aerial surveillance process. They have
developed systems consisting of large teams drone planes that pilot
themselves, automatically decide who is "suspicious" and how to go about
monitoring them, coordinate their activities with other drones nearby, and
notify human operators if something suspicious is occurring. This greatly
increases the amount of area that can be continuously monitored, while
reducing the number of human operators required. Thus a swarm of automated,
self-directing drones can automatically patrol a city and track suspicious
individuals, reporting their activities back to a centralized monitoring
station.[56][57][58]

### [edit] Data mining & profiling

Data mining is the search for hidden patterns in large amounts of data. Data
profiling in this context is the process of assembling information about a
particular individual or group in order to generate a profile â that is, a
picture of their patterns and behavior. Data profiling can be an extremely
powerful tool for psychological and social network analysis. A skilled analyst
can discover facts about a person that they might not even be consciously
aware of themself.[59]

Economic (such as credit card purchases) and social (such as telephone calls
and emails) transactions in modern society create large amounts of stored data
and records. In the past this data would be documented in paper records and
would leave a "paper trail", or simply not be documented at all. Correlation
of paper-based records was a laborious process -- it require human
intelligence operators to manually dig through documents, which was time-
consuming and incomplete, at best.

But today many of these records are electronic, resulting in an "electronic
trail". Every use of a bank machine, payment by credit card, use of a phone
card, call from home, checked out library book, rented video, or otherwise
complete recorded transaction generates an electronic record. Public records
-- such as birth, court, tax and other records -- are increasily being
digitized and made available online. In addition, due to laws like CALEA, web
traffic and online purchases are also available for profiling. Electronic
record-keeping makes data easily collectable, storable, and accessible -- so
that high-volume, efficient aggregation and analysis is possible at
significantly lower costs.

Information relating to many of these individual transactions is often easily
available because it is not generally not guarded in isolation, since the
information, such as the title of a movie a person has rented, might not seem
sensitive. However, when many such transactions are aggregated they can be
used to assemble a detailed profile revealing the actions, habits, beliefs,
locations frequented, social connections, and preferences of the individual.
This profile is then used, by programs such as ADVISE [60] and TALON, to
determine whether the person is a military, criminal, or political threat.

In addition to its own aggregation and profiling tools, the government is able
to access information from third parties â for example, banks, credit
companies or employers, etc. â by requesting access informally, by
compelling access through the use of subpoenas or other procedures[61], or by
purchasing data from commercial data aggregators or data brokers. The United
States has currently spent $370 million on its 43 planned fusion centers,
which are national network of surveillance centers that are located in over 30
states. The centers will collect and analyze vast amounts of data on U.S.
citizens. It will get this data by consolidating personal information from
sources such as state driver's licensing agencies, hospital records, criminal
records, school records, credit bureaus, banks, etc. -- and placing this
information in a centralized database that can be accessed from all of the
centers, as well as other federal law enforcement and intelligence
agencies.[62]

Under United States v. Miller (1976), data held by third parties is generally
not subject to Fourth Amendment warrant requirements.

### [edit] Corporate Surveillance

Corporate surveillance is the monitoring of a person or group's behavior by a
corporation. The data collected is most often used for marketing purposes or
sold to other corporations, but is also regularly shared with government
agencies. It can be used as a form of business intelligence, which enables the
corporation to better tailor their products and/or services to be desirable by
their customers. Or it the data can be sold to other corporations, so that
they can use it for the aforementioned purpose. Or it can be used for direct
marketing purposes, such as the targeted advertisements on Google and Yahoo,
where ads are targeted to the user of the search engine by analyzing their
search history and emails[63] (if they use free webmail services), which is
kept in a database. [64]

For instance, Google, the world's most popular search engine, stores
identifying information for each web search. An IP address and the search
phrase used are stored in a database for up to 18 months.[65] Google also
scans the content of emails of users of its Gmail webmail service, in order to
create targeted advertising based on what people are talking about in their
personal email correspondences.[66] Google is, by far, the largest Internet
advertising agency -- millions of sites place Google's advertising banners and
links on their websites, in order to earn money from visitors who click on the
ads. Each page containing Google ads adds, reads, and modifies "cookies" on
each visitor's computer.[67] These cookies track the user across all of these
sites, and gather information about their web surfing habits, keeping track of
which sites they visit, and what they do when they are on these sites. This
information, along with the information from their email accounts, and search
engine histories, is stored by Google to use for build a profile of the user
to deliver better-targeted advertising.[66]

The United States government often gains access to these databases, either by
producing a warrant for it, or by simply asking. The Department of Homeland
Security has openly stated that it uses data collected from consumer credit
and direct marketing agencies -- such as Google -- for augmenting the profiles
of individuals that it is monitoring.[64]

The U.S. Federal government has gathered information from grocery store
"discount card" programs, which track customers' shopping patterns and store
them in databases, in order to look for "terrorists" by analyzing shoppers'
buying patterns.[68]

### [edit] Human operatives

Organizations that have enemies who wish to gather information about the
groups members or activities face the issue of infiltration. [69][70]

In addition to operatives infiltrating an organization, the surveilling party
may put pressure on certain members of the target organization to act as
informants (i.e. disclose the information they hold on the organization and
its members).[71][72]

Fielding operatives is very expensive, and for governments with wide-reaching
electronic surveillance tools at their disposal the information recovered from
operatives can often be obtained from less problematic forms of surveillance
such as those mentioned above. Nevertheless, human infiltrators are still
common today. For instance, in 2007 documents surfaced showing that the FBI
was planning to field a total of 15,000 undercover agents and informants in
response to a anti-terrorism directive sent out by George W. Bush in 2004 that
ordered intelligence and law enforcement agencies to increase their HUMINT
capabilities.[73]

### [edit] Satellite Imagery

On May 25, 2007 the U.S. Director of National Intelligence Michael McConnell
authorized the National Applications Office (NAO) of the Department of
Homeland Security to allow local, state, and domestic Federal agencies to
access imagery from military intelligence satellites and aircraft sensors
which can now be used to observe the activities of U.S. citizens. The
satellites and aircraft sensors will be able to penetrate cloud cover, detect
chemical traces, and identify objects in buildings and "underground bunkers",
and will provide real-time video at much higher resolutions than the still-
images produced by programs such as Google Earth.[74][75][76][77][78][79]

### [edit] Identification & Credentials

<IMG>

<IMG>

A card containing an identification number

One of the simplest forms of identification is the carrying of credentials.
Some nations have an identity card system to aid identification, whilst many,
such as Britain, are considering it but face public opposition. Other
documents, such as driver's licenses, library cards, bankers or credit cards
are also used to verify identity.

If the form of the identity card is "machine-readable," usually using an
encoded magnetic stripe or identification number (such as a social security
number) that corroborates the subject's identifying data. In this case it may
create a document trail when it is checked and scanned, which can be used in
profiling, as mentioned above.

### [edit] RFID & Geolocation Devices

<IMG>

<IMG>

Hand with planned insertion point for Verichip device

<IMG>

<IMG>

RFID chip pulled from new credit card

#### [edit] RFID tagging

Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tagging is the use of very small
electronic devices (called 'RFID tags') which are applied to or incorporated
into a product, animal, or person for the purpose of identification and
tracking using radio waves. The tags can be read from several meters away.

Many companies are already "tagging" their workers, who are monitored while on
the job. Workers in U.K. went on general strike in protest of having
themselves tagged. They felt that it was dehumanizing to have all of their
movements tracked with RFID chips.[80] Some critics have expressed fears that
people will soon be tracked and scanned everywhere they go. [81]

Verichip is an RFID device produced by a company called Applied Digital
Solutions (ADS). Verichip is slightly larger than a grain of rice, and is
injected under the skin. The injection reportedly feels similar to receiving a
shot. The chip is encased in glass, and stores a "VeriChip Subscriber Number"
which the scanner uses to access their personal information, via the internet,
from Verichip Inc.'s database, the "Global VeriChip Subscriber Registry".
Thousands of people have already had them inserted.[81] In Mexico, for
example, required 160 workers at the Attorney General's office to have the
chip injected for identity verification and access control purposes.[82][83]

Concerns that soon every object that is purchased, and perhaps ID cards, will
have RFID devices in them, which would broadcast information about people as
they walk past scanners (what type of phone they have, what type of shoes they
have on, etc) that can talk to nearby scanners, and be used for
identification, tracking, or targeted marketing.[84]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Diagram of GPS satellites currently orbiting Earth

#### [edit] Global Positioning Systems (GPS)

The U.S. Federal government has planted hidden GPS tracking devices in
people's vehicles to monitor their movements, without a warrant. They are
arguing in court right now that they have the right to do this.[85]

Several cities are running pilot projects to force parolees to wear GPS
devices to track their movements when they get out of prison.[86]

#### [edit] Mobile phones

Mobile phones are also commonly used to collect geolocation data. The
geographical location of a mobile phone (and thus the person carrying it) can
be determined easily (whether it is being used or not), using a technique
known multilateration to calculate the differences in time for a signal to
travel from the cell phone to each of several cell towers near the owner of
the phone. [21][22]

### [edit] Surveillance devices, or "bugs"

Surveillance devices, or "bugs", are hidden electronic devices which are used
to capture, record, and/or transmit data to a receiving party such as a law
enforcement agency.

The U.S. has run numerous domestic intelligence, such as COINTELPRO, which
have bugged the homes, offices, and vehicles of thousands of U.S. citizens,
usually political activists, subversives, and criminals.[87]

Law enforcement and intelligence services in the U.K. and the United States
possess technology to remotely activate the microphones in cell phones, by
accessing the phone's diagnostic/maintenance features, in order to listen to
conversations that take place nearby the person who holds the
phone.[18][19][20]

### [edit] Postal services

As more people use faxes and e-mail the significance of surveilling the postal
system is decreasing, in favor of Internet and telephone surveillance. But
interception of post is still an available option for law enforcement and
intelligence agencies, in certain circumstances.

The CIA and FBI have performed twelve separate mail-opening campaigns targeted
towards U.S. citizens. In one of these programs, more than 215,000
communications were intercepted, opened, and photographed. [88][89]

## [edit] Controversy surrounding surveillance

<IMG>

<IMG>

Graffiti expressing concern about proliferation of video surveillance

### [edit] Supporting surveillance

Some supporters of surveillance believe that it protects them from terrorists
and criminals.

Other supporters simply believe that there is nothing that can be done about
it, and that people must become accustomed to having no privacy. As Sun
Microsystems CEO Scott McNealy said: "You have zero privacy anyway. Get over
it."[90][91]

Another common argument[92] is: "If you aren't doing something wrong then you
don't have anything to fear." Critics point to the fact that most people do
have things to hide.[92][93] For example, if a person is looking for a new
job, they might not want their employers to know this.[94] Or if a person is
part of a political group which opposes the policies of the national
government, they might not want the government to know their names and what
they've been reading, so that the government cannot easily subvert their
organization or arrest them.[93] Critics state that while a person might not
have anything to hide right now, the government might later implement policies
that they do wish to oppose, and that opposition might then be impossible due
to mass surveillance enabling the government to identify and remove political
threats.[95]

### [edit] Opposing surveillance

#### [edit] Totalitarianism

<IMG>

<IMG>

The People's Republic of China has installed large amounts of surveillance
equipment, as part of its Golden Shield program, to identify and monitor
political dissidents, who are often tortured, executed, or imprisoned.

Programs such as the Total Information Awareness program, and laws such as the
Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act have led many groups to fear
that society is moving towards a state of mass surveillance with severely
limited personal, social, political freedoms, where dissenting individuals or
groups will be strategically removed in COINTELPRO-like purges.[3][4][24]

Kate Martin, of the Center For National Security Studies said of the use of
military spy satellites being used to monitor the activities of U.S. citizens:
"They are laying the bricks one at a time for a police state."[78]

#### [edit] Privacy

Numerous civil rights groups and privacy groups oppose surveillance as a
violation of people's right to privacy. Such groups include: Electronic
Privacy Information Center, Electronic Frontier Foundation, ACLU

There have been several lawsuits such as Hepting v. AT&T and EPIC v.
Department of Justice by groups or individuals, opposing certain surveillance
activities.

Legislative proceedings such as those that took place during the Church
Committee, which investigated domestic intelligence programs such as
COINTELPRO, have also weighed the pros and cons of surveillance.

## [edit] Countersurveillance, inverse surveillance, sousveillance

Countersurveillance is the practice of avoiding surveillance or making
surveillance difficult. With recent developments â the Internet, increasing
prevalence of electronic security systems, armed UAVs flying at 60,000 feet,
and large corporate/government computer databases â counter surveillance has
dramatically grown in scope and complexity.

Inverse surveillance is the practice of reversalism on surveillance (e.g.,
citizens photographing police). Well-known examples are George Holliday's
recording of the Rodney King beating and the organization Copwatch, which
attempts to surveill police officers to prevent police brutality.

Sousveillance (a term coined by Steve Mann, a professor at the University of
Toronto) is inverse surveillance that includes the recording of an activity by
a participant in the activity.[96]

## [edit] Surveillance in popular culture

  * George Orwell's novel 1984 portrays a fictional totalitarian surveillance society which has a very simple (by today's standards) mass surveillance system consisting of human operatives, informants, and two-way "telescreens" in people's homes. Because of the impact of this book, "Orwellian" is a common term used to describe mass surveillance technologies.
  * In the movie Minority Report, the police and government intelligence agencies have micro aerial vehicles that are used in SWAT operations and for surveillance purposes.
  * The movie THX-1138 portrays a society where people are drugged with sedatives and antidepressants, and have surveillance cameras watching them everywhere they go
  * The movie Gattaca portrays a society where biometric surveillance is used to check to see if people are genetically engineered "superior" humans or genetically natural "inferior" humans.
  * The book The Handmaid's Tale, as well as a film based on it, portray a totalitarian Christian theocracy where all citizens are kept under constant surveillance.
  * The Dead Kennedys song "I Am The Owl" is about government surveillance and social engineering of political groups
  * A song titled "Crazy" by Brett Dennen discusses satellites watching people from outer space.

## [edit] See also

  * Information Awareness Office
  * Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act
  * Carnivore (FBI)
  * COINTELPRO
  * Computer surveillance
  * NSA warrantless surveillance
  * ECHELON
  * Hepting v. AT&T
  * ADVISE
  * TALON
  * VIRAT
  * Heterogeneous Aerial Reconnaissance Team
  * Mass surveillance
  * TEMPEST
  * GhostNet

## [edit] References

  1. ^ OED
  2. ^ Merriam-Webster's Online Dictionary
  3. ^ a b c "Is the U.S. Turning Into a Surveillance Society?" (in English). American Civil Liberties Union. http://www.aclu.org/privacy/gen/index.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  4. ^ a b "Bigger Monster, Weaker Chains: The Growth of an American Surveillance Society" (in English). American Civil Liberties Union. January 15, 2003. http://www.aclu.org/FilesPDFs/aclu_report_bigger_monster_weaker_chains.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  5. ^ Diffie, Whitfield; Susan Landau (August, 2008). "Internet Eavesdropping: A Brave New World of Wiretapping" (in English). Scientific American. http://www.sciam.com/article.cfm?id=internet-eavesdropping. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  6. ^ a b "CALEA Archive -- Electronic Frontier Foundation" (in English). Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). http://w2.eff.org/Privacy/Surveillance/CALEA/?f=archive.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  7. ^ a b "CALEA: The Perils of Wiretapping the Internet" (in English). Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). http://www.eff.org/issues/calea. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  8. ^ a b "CALEA: Frequently Asked Questions" (in English). Electronic Frontier Foundation (website). http://www.eff.org/pages/calea-faq. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  9. ^ Hill, Michael (October 11, 2004). "Government funds chat room surveillance research" (in English). Associated Press (USA Today). http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/surveillance/2004-10-11-chatroom-surv_x.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-19.
  10. ^ McCullagh, Declan (January 30, 2007). "FBI turns to broad new wiretap method" (in English). ZDNet News. http://news.zdnet.com/2100-9595_22-151059.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  11. ^ "FBI's Secret Spyware Tracks Down Teen Who Made Bomb Threats". Wired Magazine. 2007-07-18. http://www.wired.com/politics/law/news/2007/07/fbi_spyware.
  12. ^ McNamara, Joel. "Complete, Unofficial Tempest Page" (in English). http://www.eskimo.com/~joelm/tempest.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  13. ^ Van Eck, Wim (1985). "Electromagnetic Radiation from Video Display Units: An Eavesdropping Risk?". Computers & Security 4: 269â286. doi:10.1016/0167-4048(85)90046-X. http://jya.com/emr.pdf.
  14. ^ Kuhn, M.G. (2004). "Electromagnetic Eavesdropping Risks of Flat-Panel Displays". 4th Workshop on Privacy Enhancing Technologies: 23â25. http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~mgk25/pet2004-fpd.pdf.
  15. ^ Singel, Ryan (September 10, 2007). "Rogue FBI Letters Hint at Phone Companies' Own Data Mining Programs - Updated" (in English). Threat Level (Wired). http://blog.wired.com/27bstroke6/2007/09/rogue-fbi-lette.html#previouspost. Retrieved on 2009-03-19.
  16. ^ Roland, Neil (March 20, 2007). "Mueller Orders Audit of 56 FBI Offices for Secret Subpoenas" (in English). Bloomberg News. http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601087&sid=aBd9Zzld22w0&refer=home. Retrieved on 2009-03-19.
  17. ^ Piller, Charles; Eric Lichtblau (July 29, 2002). "FBI Plans to Fight Terror With High-Tech Arsenal" (in English). LA Times. http://articles.latimes.com/2002/jul/29/nation/na-technology29. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  18. ^ a b McCullagh, Declan; Anne Broache (December 1, 2006). "FBI taps cell phone mic as eavesdropping tool" (in English). CNet News. http://news.cnet.com/FBI-taps-cell-phone-mic-as-eavesdropping-tool/2100-1029_3-6140191.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  19. ^ a b Odell, Mark (August 1, 2005). "Use of mobile helped police keep tabs on suspect" (in English). Financial Times. http://news.ft.com/cms/s/7166b8a2-02cb-11da-84e5-00000e2511c8.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  20. ^ a b "Telephones" (in English). Western Regional Security Office (NOAA official site). 2001. http://www.wrc.noaa.gov/wrso/security_guide/telephon.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-22.
  21. ^ a b "Tracking a suspect by mobile phone" (in English). BBC News. August 3, 2005. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/4738219.stm. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  22. ^ a b Miller, Joshua (March 14, 2009). "Cell Phone Tracking Can Locate Terrorists - But Only Where It's Legal" (in English). FOX News. http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,509211,00.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  23. ^ "Warrantless Location Tracking" (in English). N.Y.U. Law Review. 2008. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1092293. Retrieved on 2009-03-24.
  24. ^ a b "Britain is 'surveillance society'" (in English). BBC News. November 2, 2006. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/6108496.stm. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  25. ^ Spielman, Fran (February 19, 2009). "Surveillance cams help fight crime, city says" (in English). Chicago Sun Times. http://www.suntimes.com/news/politics/1440402,mayor-daley-emergency-surveillance-cameras.article. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  26. ^ Schorn, Daniel (September 6, 2006). "We're Watching: How Chicago Authorities Keep An Eye On The City" (in English). CBS News. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2006/09/05/five_years/main1968121.shtml. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  27. ^ a b Klein, Naomi (May 29, 2008). "China's All-Seeing Eye" (in English). Rolling Stone. http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/story/20797485/chinas_allseeing_eye/print. Retrieved on 2009-03-20.
  28. ^ "Another Tool for Big Brother?" (in English). Associated Press (Wired News). July 2, 2003. http://www.wired.com/politics/law/news/2003/07/59471. Retrieved on 2009-03-20.
  29. ^ Bonsor, K.. "How Facial Recognition Systems Work". http://computer.howstuffworks.com/facial-recognition.htm. Retrieved on 2006-06-18.
  30. ^ McNealy, Scott. "Privacy is (Virtually) Dead". http://www.jrnyquist.com/aug20/privacy.htm. Retrieved on 2006-12-24.
  31. ^ "Mayor Fenty Launches VIPS Program; New System Will Consolidate Cityâs Closed-Circuit TV Monitoring" (in English). www.dc.gov. April 8, 2008. http://www.dc.gov/mayor/news/release.asp?id=1273&mon=200804. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  32. ^ "EPIC Video Surveillance Information Page" (in English). EPIC. http://epic.org/privacy/surveillance/. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  33. ^ Keefe, Patrick (March 12, 2006). ", Can Network Theory Thwart Terrorists?" (in English). New York Times.
  34. ^ a b Albrechtslund, Anders (March 3, 2008). "Online Social Networking as Participatory Surveillance" (in English). First Monday 13 (3). http://www.uic.edu/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2142/1949. Retrieved on March 14, 2009.
  35. ^ Fuchs, Christian (2009) (in English). Social Networking Sites and the Surveillance Society. A Critical Case Study of the Usage of studiVZ, Facebook, and MySpace by Students in Salzburg in the Context of Electronic Surveillance. Salzburg and Vienna: Forschungsgruppe Unified Theory of Information. ISBN 978-3-200-01428-2. http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&source=web&ct=res&cd=3&url=http%3A%2F%2Ffuchs.icts.sbg.ac.at%2FSNS_Surveillance_Fuchs.pdf&ei=2XG7SY6PI4GEsQP2v9VI&usg=AFQjCNGKqGRfx90BvrQgdCZbfLfSLCqE5A&sig2=1THunpIf4nMT4MV79FGufQ. Retrieved on March 14, 2009.
  36. ^ a b c Ethier, Jason. "Current Research in Social Network Theory" (in English). Northeastern University College of Computer and Infomation Science. http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/perrolle/archive/Ethier-SocialNetworks.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-15.
  37. ^ Marks, Paul (June 9, 2006). "Pentagon sets its sights on social networking websites" (in English). New Scientist. http://www.newscientist.com/article/mg19025556.200?DCMP=NLC-nletter&nsref=mg19025556.200. Retrieved on 2009-03-16.
  38. ^ Kawamoto, Dawn (June 9, 2006). "Is the NSA reading your MySpace profile?" (in English). CNET News. http://news.cnet.com/8301-10784_3-6082047-7.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-16.
  39. ^ Ressler, Steve (July 2006). "Social Network Analysis as an Approach to Combat Terrorism: Past, Present, and Future Research" (in English). Homeland Security Affairs Volume II (2). http://www.hsaj.org/?fullarticle=2.2.8. Retrieved on March 14, 2009.
  40. ^ a b Singel, Ryan (October 29, 2007). "AT&T Invents Programming Language for Mass Surveillance" (in English). Threat Level (Wired). http://blog.wired.com/27bstroke6/2007/10/att-invents-pro.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-19.
  41. ^ Singel, Ryan (October 16, 2007). "Legally Questionable FBI Requests for Calling Circle Info More Widespread than Previously Known" (in English). Threat Level (Wired). http://blog.wired.com/27bstroke6/2007/10/legally-questio.html#previouspost. Retrieved on 2009-03-19.
  42. ^ Havenstein, Heather (September 12, 2008). "One in five employers uses social networks in hiring process" (in English). Computer World. http://www.computerworld.com/action/article.do?command=viewArticleBasic&articleId=9114560. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  43. ^ Woodward, John; Christopher Horn, Julius Gatune, and Aryn Thomas (2003) (in English). Biometrics: A Look at Facial Recognition. RAND Corporation. ISBN 0-8330-3302-6.
  44. ^ Frank, Thomas (May 10, 2007). "Face recognition next in terror fight". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/news/washington/2007-05-10-facial-recognition-terrorism_N.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-16.
  45. ^ Vlahos, James (January 2008). "Surveillance Society: New High-Tech Cameras Are Watching You" (in English). Popular Mechanics. http://www.popularmechanics.com/technology/military_law/4236865.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  46. ^ Arena, Kelly; Carol Cratty (February 4, 2008). "FBI wants palm prints, eye scans, tattoo mapping" (in English). CNN. http://www.cnn.com/2008/TECH/02/04/fbi.biometrics/. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  47. ^ Gross, Grant (February 13, 2008). "Lockheed wins $1 billion FBI biometric contract". IDG News Service (InfoWorld). http://www.infoworld.com/article/08/02/13/Lockheed-wins-1B-FBI-biometric-contract_1.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-18.
  48. ^ "LAPD: We Know That Mug" (in English). Associated Press (Wired Magazine). December 26, 2004. http://www.wired.com/science/discoveries/news/2004/12/66142. Retrieved on 2009-03-18.
  49. ^ a b Dotinga, Randy (October 14, 2004). "Can't Hide Your Lying ... Face?" (in English). Wired Magazine. http://www.wired.com/science/discoveries/news/2004/10/65322. Retrieved on 2009-03-18.
  50. ^ Gasparre, Richard (January 25, 2008). "The U.S. and Unmanned Flight: Part 1" (in English). airforce-technology.com. http://www.airforce-technology.com/features/feature1528/. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  51. ^ Fickes, Michael (October 1, 2004). "Automated Eye In The Sky" (in English). GovernmentSecurity.com. http://govtsecurity.com/mag/automated_eye_sky/. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  52. ^ McCullagh, Declan (March 29, 2006). "Drone aircraft may prowl U.S. skies" (in English). CNet News. http://news.cnet.com/2100-11746_3-6055658.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  53. ^ a b Warwick, Graham (June 12, 2007). "US police experiment with Insitu, Honeywell UAVs" (in English). FlightGlobal.com. http://www.flightglobal.com/articles/2007/12/06/220084/us-police-experiment-with-insitu-honeywell-uavs.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  54. ^ La Franchi, Peter (July 17, 2007). "UK Home Office plans national police UAV fleet" (in English). Flight International. http://www.flightglobal.com/articles/2007/07/17/215507/uk-home-office-plans-national-police-uav-fleet.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  55. ^ "No Longer Science Fiction: Less Than Lethal & Directed Energy Weapons" (in English). International Online Defense Magazine. February 22, 2005. http://www.policeone.com/police-products/less-lethal/articles/99337-No-Longer-Science-Fiction-Less-Than-Lethal-Directed-Energy-Weapons/. Retrieved on 2009-03-15.
  56. ^ "HART Overview" (in English). IPTO (DARPA) -- Official website. August 2008. http://www.darpa.mil/ipto/programs/hart/docs/HART_Overview.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-03-15.
  57. ^ "BAA 04-05-PIP: Heterogeneous Airborne Reconnaissance Team (HART)" (in English). Information Processing Technology Office (DARPA) -- Official Website. December 5, 2003. http://www.darpa.mil/ipto/solicit/baa/BAA-04-05_PIP.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-03-16.
  58. ^ Sirak, Michael (Nov 29, 2007). "DARPA, Northrop Grumman Move Into Next Phase of UAV Control Architecture" (in English). Defense Daily. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_6712/is_40_236/ai_n29399227. Retrieved on 2009-03-16.
  59. ^ Hildebrandt, Mireille; Serge Gutwirth (2008) (in English). Profiling the European Citizen: Cross Disciplinary Perspectives. Dordrecht: Springer. ISBN 978-1-4020-6913-0.
  60. ^ Clayton, Mark (February 09, 2006). "US Plans Massive Data Sweep" (in English). Christian Science Monitor. http://www.csmonitor.com/2006/0209/p01s02-uspo.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  61. ^ Flint, Lara (September 24, 2003). "Administrative Subpoenas for the FBI: A Grab for Unchecked Executive Power" (in English). The Center For Democracy & Technology (official site). http://www.cdt.org/security/usapatriot/030924cdt.shtml. Retrieved on 2009-03-20.
  62. ^ "âNational Networkâ of Fusion Centers Raises Specter of COINTELPRO" (in English). EPIC Spotlight on Surveillance. June 2007. http://epic.org/privacy/surveillance/spotlight/0607/default.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  63. ^ Story, Louise (November 1, 2007). "F.T.C. to Review Online Ads and Privacy" (in English). New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/01/technology/01Privacy.html?_r=1. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  64. ^ a b Butler, Don (February 24, 2009). "Surveillance in society" (in English). The Star Phoenix (CanWest). http://www.thestarphoenix.com/Technology/Surveillance+society/1322333/story.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  65. ^ Soghoian, Chris (September 11, 2008). "Debunking Google's log anonymization propaganda" (in English). CNET News. http://news.cnet.com/8301-13739_3-10038963-46.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-21.
  66. ^ a b Joshi, Priyanki (March 21, 2009). "Every move you make, Google will be watching you" (in English). Business Standard. http://www.business-standard.com/india/news/every-move-you-make-google-will-be-watching-you/57071/on. Retrieved on 2009-03-21.
  67. ^ "Advertising and Privacy" (in English). Google (company page). 2009. http://www.google.com/privacy_ads.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-21.
  68. ^ Vlahos, Kelley (August 01, 2002). "Store Customer Cards a Source for FBI?" (in English). FOX News. http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,59262,00.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  69. ^ anonymous (26 Jan, 2006). "Information on the Confidential Source in the Auburn Arrests" (in English). Portland Indymedia. http://portland.indymedia.org/en/2006/01/332735.shtml. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  70. ^ Myers, Lisa (December 14, 2005). "Is the Pentagon spying on Americans?" (in English). NBC Nightly News (msnbc.com). http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/10454316. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  71. ^ "Senate Hearing: The Use Of Informants In FBI Domestic Intelligence Investigations" (in English). SUPPLEMENTARY DETAILED STAFF REPORTS ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES AND THE RIGHTS OF AMERICANS. U.S. Senate. April 23, 1976. http://www.icdc.com/~paulwolf/cointelpro/churchfinalreportIIId.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  72. ^ Ranalli, Ralph (11/21/2003). "FBI informant system called a failure" (in English). Boston Globe. http://www.truthinjustice.org/corrupt-FBI.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  73. ^ Ross, Brian (July 25, 2007). "FBI Proposes Building Network of U.S. Informants" (in English). Blotter. ABC News. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2007/07/fbi-proposes-bu.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  74. ^ "U.S. Reconnaissance Satellites: Domestic Targets" (in English). National Security Archive. http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB229/index.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-16.
  75. ^ Block, Robert (August 15, 2007). "U.S. to Expand Domestic Use Of Spy Satellites" (in English). Wall Street Journal. http://online.wsj.com/public/article/SB118714764716998275.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  76. ^ Gorman, Siobhan (October 1, 2008). "Satellite-Surveillance Program to Begin Despite Privacy Concerns" (in English). The Wall Street Journal. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB122282336428992785.html?mod=googlenews_wsj. Retrieved on 2009-03-16.
  77. ^ "Fact Sheet: National Applications Office" (in English). Department of Homeland Security (official website). August 15, 2007. http://www.dhs.gov/xnews/releases/pr_1187188414685.shtm. Retrieved on 2009-03-16.
  78. ^ a b Warrick, Joby (August 16, 2007). "Domestic Use of Spy Satellites To Widen" (in English). Washington Post: pp. A01. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/08/15/AR2007081502430_pf.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  79. ^ Shrader, Katherine (9/26/2004). "Spy imagery agency watching inside U.S." (in English). Associated Press (USA Today). http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/surveillance/2004-09-26-civilian-spying_x.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  80. ^ "Two Stories Highlight the RFID Debate" (in English). RFID Update. July 19, 2005. http://www.rfidupdate.com/articles/index.php?id=914. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  81. ^ a b Lewan, Todd (July 21, 2007). "Microchips in humans spark privacy debate" (in English). Associated Press (USA Today). http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/surveillance/2007-07-21-chips_N.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  82. ^ Gardener, W. David (July 15, 2004). "RFID Chips Implanted In Mexican Law-Enforcement Workers" (in English). Information Week. http://www.informationweek.com/news/global-cio/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=23901004. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  83. ^ Campbell, Monica (August 04, 2004). "Law enforcement in Mexico goes a bit bionic" (in English). Christian Science Monitor. http://www.csmonitor.com/2004/0804/p01s04-woam.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  84. ^ McCullagh, Declan (January 13, 2003). "RFID Tags: Big Brother in small packages" (in English). CNET News. http://news.cnet.com/2010-1069-980325.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-18.
  85. ^ Claburn, Thomas (March 4, 2009). "Court Asked To Disallow Warrantless GPS Tracking" (in English). Information Week. http://www.informationweek.com/news/government/federal/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=215800542. Retrieved on 2009-03-18.
  86. ^ Hilden, Julie (2002). "What legal questions are the new chip implants for humans likely to raise?" (in English). CNN.com (FindLaw). http://archives.cnn.com/2002/LAW/05/columns/fl.hilden.chip/index.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  87. ^ Wolf, Paul. "COINTELPRO" (in English). (online collection of historical documents). http://www.icdc.com/~paulwolf/cointelpro/cointel.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  88. ^ "SUPPLEMENTARY DETAILED STAFF REPORTS ON INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES AND THE RIGHTS OF AMERICANS: ... DOMESTIC CIA AND FBI MAIL OPENING PROGRAMS" (in English). SELECT COMMITTEE TO STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES UNITED STATES SENATE. April 23, 1976. http://www.icdc.com/~paulwolf/cointelpro/churchfinalreportIIIh.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  89. ^ Goldstein, Robert (April 23, 2001) (in English). Political repression in modern America from 1870 to 1976. University of Illinois Press. pp. 466\. ISBN 978-0252069642.
  90. ^ Sprenger, Polly (January 26, 1999). "Sun on Privacy: 'Get Over It'" (in English). Wired Magazine. http://www.wired.com/politics/law/news/1999/01/17538. Retrieved on 2009-03-20.
  91. ^ Baig, Edward; Marcia Stepanek, Neil Gross (April 5, 1999). "Privacy" (in English). Business Week. http://www.businessweek.com/1999/99_14/b3623028.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-20.
  92. ^ a b Solove, Daniel (July 12, 2007). "'I've Got Nothing to Hide' and Other Misunderstandings of Privacy" (in English). San Diego Law Review (George Washington University Law School) 44. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=998565. Retrieved on March 16, 2009.
  93. ^ a b "Something to Hide: Writers and Artists Against The Surveillance State" (in English). American Civil Liberties Union (official site). http://www.aclu.org/somethingtohide/. Retrieved on 2009-03-20.
  94. ^ Stevens, Toby (February 25, 2009). "Â« Biometrics and Privacy" (in English). ComputerWeekly. http://www.computerweekly.com/blogs/the-data-trust-blog/2009/02/debunking-a-myth-if-you-have-n.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-20.
  95. ^ Schneier, Bruce (May 18, 2006). "The Eternal Value of Privacy" (in English). Wired News. http://www.schneier.com/essay-114.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-20.
  96. ^ Birch, Dave (2005-07-14). "The age of sousveillance". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2005/jul/14/comment.comment. Retrieved on 2007-08-06.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Garfinkel, Simson, Database Nation; The Death of Privacy in the 21st Century. O'Reilly & Associates, Inc. ISBN 0-596-00105-3

  * Jenkins, Peter Advanced Surveillance Training Manual, Intel Publishing, UK ISBN 0-9535378-1-1

  * Jensen, Derrick and Draffan, George (2004) Welcome to the Machine: Science, Surveillance, and the Culture of Control Chelsea Green Publishing Company. ISBN 978-1931498524

## [edit] External links

### [edit] General Information on Surveillance

  * Privacy Information Center
  * The Surveillance-Industrial Complex: How the American Government Is Conscripting Businesses and Individuals in the Construction of a Surveillance Society
  * EFF Privacy Resources
  * EPIC Privacy Resources
  * A Report on the Surveillance Society for the Information Commissioner by the Surveillance Studies Network, September, 2006

### [edit] Historical Information

  * COINTELPRO \-- FBI counterintelligence programs designed to neutralize political dissidents.

### [edit] Legal Resources

  * EFF Legal Cases
  * Guide to lawful intercept legislation around the world

v â¢ d â¢ e

Espionage  
Agent handling Â· Black operation Â· Black bag operation Â· Concealment device
Â· Cryptography Â· Dead drop Â· Eavesdropping Â· False flag Â· Clandestine
HUMINT asset recruiting Â· Industrial espionage Â· Interrogation Â· Non-
official cover Â· Official cover Â· Steganography Â· Surveillance (Computer Â·
Cyber)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Intelligence cycle management  
Intelligence  
collection  
management

HUMINT/  
Human Intelligence

Clandestine HUMINT (recruiting Â· operational techniques Â· Covert action Â·
Direct action Â· Clandestine cell system)  
Special reconnaissance (organizations)  
Espionage (Agent handling Â· Black bag operation Â· Concealment device Â·
Cryptography Â· Cut-out Â· Dead drop Â· Eavesdropping Â· False flag operations
Â· Honeypot Â· Non-official cover Â· Interrogation Â· Numbers messaging Â·
One-way voice link Â· Steganography Â· Surveillance)  
SIGINT/  
Signals Intelligence

SIGINT by Alliances, Nations and Industries Â· SIGINT Operational Platforms by
Nation Â· SIGINT in Modern History Â· TEMPEST Â· Direction finding Â· Traffic
analysis  
MASINT/  
Measurement and  
Signature Intelligence

Electro-optical Â· Nuclear Â· Geophysical Â· Radar Â· Radiofrequency Â·
Materials Â· Casualty estimation  
Others

OSINT/Open Source Intelligence Â· IMINT/Imagery Intelligence Â·
FININT/Financial Intelligence Â· TECHINT/Technical intelligence  
Intelligence  
analysis  
management

Intelligence analysis Â· Cognitive traps for intelligence analysis Â· Words of
Estimative Probability Â· Analysis of Competing Hypotheses Â· Intelligence
cycle (target-centric approach)  
Intelligence  
dissemination  
management

Intelligence cycle security Â· Counter-intelligence Â· Counter-intelligence
and counter-terrorism organizations Â· List of counterintelligence
organizations Â· Counterintelligence failures  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surveillance"

Categories: French words and phrases | Surveillance | Espionage techniques |
Law enforcement | Law enforcement techniques | Crime prevention | Security |
National security | Civil rights and liberties | Privacy

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 11 April 2009, at 00:55 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



