
# HD Radio

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

HD Radio technology is a system used by AM and FM radio stations to digitally
transmit audio and data in conjunction with their analog signals. This system
enables AM and FM radio stations to simulcast both digital and analog audio
within the same channel (a hybridized digital-analog signal) as well as add
new FM channels and text information. Although HD Radio broadcasting's content
is currently subscription-free, listeners must purchase new receivers in order
to receive the digital portion of the signal. As of March 2009, 1,879 stations
covering approximately 84% of the United States[1] are broadcasting with this
technology plus more than 1,000 HD2/3 multicast channels are on the air.[1]

"HD Radio" is the trademark for iBiquity's in-band on-channel (IBOC)
technology, which was selected by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
in 2002 as a digital audio broadcasting method for the United States.[2][3]
According to iBiquity's website, the "HD" is simply a brand name and has no
meaning, although their earlier whitepaper documents refer to "Hybrid Digital"
radio technology and operating modes.[4]. There is no connection with high-
definition television (HDTV), although like HDTV the HD Radio specification
provides enhanced capabilities over the old analog format, such as 5.1
surround sound.

The HD Radio system, the only digital system approved by the FCC for digital
AM/FM broadcasts in the United States, is officially known as NRSC-5, with the
latest version being NRSC-5B.[5] Other digital radio systems include FMeXtra,
Digital Radio Mondiale (DRM+), and Compatible AM-Digital (CAM-D).

The FCC has not indicated any intent to force off analog radio broadcasts as
it has with analog television broadcasts [2], as it would not result in the
recovery of any radio spectrum rights which could be sold. Thus, there is no
deadline by which consumers must buy an HD Radio receiver.

## [edit] Overview

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
    * 1.1 AM
    * 1.2 FM
      * 1.2.1 Bandwidth
  * 2 Comparison to EU's Digital Radio
    * 2.1 FM HD Radio versus DAB
      * 2.1.1 AM HD Radio versus DRM
  * 3 Criticisms
    * 3.1 Awareness, coverage
      * 3.1.1 Proprietary and incompatible
      * 3.1.2 Reduced-quality concerns
      * 3.1.3 Reduced analog signal
      * 3.1.4 Extremely high cost
  * 4 Programming
    * 4.1 Translators
  * 5 Receivers
    * 5.1 Automotive and Home/Professional
    * 5.2 Portable
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
Digital information is transmitted using COFDM with an audio compression
algorithm called HDC (which does not mean high-definition, according to
iBiquity Digital the patent holder of the codec) with spectral band
replication (SBR). (HDC is a proprietary codec based upon but incompatible
with the MPEG-4 standard HE-AAC). HD Radio equipped stations pay a one-time
licensing fee for iBiquity's patents, software, and trademarks.[6] The cost of
converting a radio station can run between $100,000 and $200,000. [7] Receiver
manufacturers pay a royalty.[8]

If digital signal reception is lost, the HD Radio receiver will revert to the
analog signal, thereby providing seamless operation between the newer and
older transmission methods. Alternatively the HD Radio can revert to a more-
robust ~20 kilobit per second stream. Datacasting is also possible, with
metadata providing song titles or artist information.

iBiquity Digital claims that the system approaches CD quality sound and offers
reduction of both interference and static;[9] however, some listeners have
complained of increased interference on the AM band (see AM, below).

### [edit] AM

Sending pure digital data through the approximately 20 kilohertz AM channel is
roughly equivalent to sending data through two 33 kbit/s analog telephone
lines, thus limiting the maximum throughput possible. By using spectral band
replication the HDC+SBR codec is able to recreate sounds up to 15,000 Hz, thus
achieving FM quality on the bandwidth-tight AM band.[10] The HD Radio AM
hybrid mode offers two options which can carry approximately 40 or 60 kbit/s
of data, but most AM digital stations default to the more-robust 40 kbit/s
mode which features redundancy (same signal broadcast twice). HD Radio also
provides a pure digital mode, which lacks an analog signal for fallback and
instead reverts to a 20 kbit/s signal during times of poor reception. The pure
digital mode transmissions will stay within the AM stations channel instead of
spilling into the channels next to the station transmitting "HD radio".

The AM version of HD Radio technology uses the 20 kHz channel, and overlaps 5
kHz (halfway) into the adjacent channel on both sides. When operating in pure
digital mode, the AM HD Radio signal fits inside a standard 20 kHz channel
(20-40 kbit/s) or an extended 30 kHz channel (40-60 kbit/s), at the discretion
of the station manager. As AM radio stations are spaced at 9 kHz (Europe) or
10 kHz (Americas) intervals, much of the digital information overlaps adjacent
channels when in hybrid mode. Some nighttime listeners have expressed concern
this design harms reception of adjacent channels [11][12] with one formal
complaint filed regarding the matter: WYSL owner Bob Savage against WBZ in
Boston. The digital radio signal received on a conventional AM receiver tuned
to an adjacent channel sounds like a large waterfall or similar white noise-
like hiss, as can be heard in the audio soundclip referenced in the previous
sentence. However, this sort of signal, at low levels, creates less annoying
interference than other types of signal transmission methods.[citation needed]

### [edit] FM

<IMG>

<IMG>

HD Radio Transmitter

<IMG>

<IMG>

Spectrum of FM broadcast station without HD Radio

<IMG>

<IMG>

Spectrum of FM broadcast station with HD Radio

The FM hybrid digital/analog mode offers four options which can carry
approximately 100, 112, 125, or 150 kbit/s of lossy data depending upon the
Station Manager's power budget and/or desired range of signal. The HD Radio
also provides several pure digital modes with up to 300 kbit/s bitrate, and
enabling extra features like surround sound. Like AM, pure digital FM provides
a "fall back" condition where it reverts to a more-robust 25 kbit/s signal.

FM stations have the option to subdivide their datastream into sub-channels
(FM97-HD1, -HD2, -HD3) of varying audio quality. The multiple services are
similar to the digital subchannels found in ATSC-compliant digital television
using multiplexed broadcasting. For example, some Top 40 stations have added
Hot AC and Classic rock to their sub-channels to provide more variety to
listeners.[13] Stations may eventually go all-digital, thus allowing as many
as three full-power channels and four low-power channels (seven total). As
defined by iBiquity these channels could be sub-divided into CD-quality (100
kbit/s), FM-quality (25-50 kbit/s), AM-quality (12 kbit/s), or Talk-quality (5
kbit/s) channels. Alternatively, they could broadcast one single channel at
300 kbit/s.

Where the digital signal fails, the analog signal is used as a fallback for
the main digital channel (normally HD1), requiring synchronization of the two.
Current FCC rules require that one channel be a simulcast of the analog
signal.

Stations can transmit HD Radio through their existing antennas using a
diplexer as on AM, or are permitted by the FCC to use a separate antenna at
the same location.

#### [edit] Bandwidth

Currently, FM stations in the United States and Canada are licensed to carry
130 kilohertz of bandwidth, requiring approximately 260 kilohertz of spectrum.
Only 15 kHz of the modulation bandwidth is used by analog Monaural audio, with
the remainder used for stereo, RBDS, paging, radio reading service, rental to
other customers, or as a transmitter-studio link for in-house telemetry.

In regular hybrid mode, a station has its full Â± 130 kHz of analog bandwidth,
and adds an extra Â± 70 kHz for its digital signals, thus taking a full 400
kHz of width. FM stations also have the option to discontinue existing
subcarrier services (usually at 92 kHz and 67 kHz) in order to carry extended
HD Radio, though such services can be restored through use of the digital
subchannels that are then made available. However, this requires the
replacement of all related equipment both for the broadcasters and all of the
receivers that use the discontinued services.

The ratio of power of the analog signal to the digital signal is standardized
at 100:1, devoting 1% of the total carrier power to the digital signal. The
National Association of Broadcasters (NAB) is expected to request a 10 dB
(10Ã) increase [14] in the digital signal from the FCC. This equates to an
increase to 10% of the total carrier power and a decrease in the analog signal
from 99% to 90%. This may reduce analog coverage slightly, but results in a
dramatic improvement in digital coverage.

There are still some concerns that HD Radio on FM will increase interference
between different stations because HD Radio does not fit within the FCC
spectral mask. North American FM channels are spaced 200 kHz apart. An HD
Radio station will not generally cause interference to any analog station
within its 1 mV/m service contour, the limit above which the FCC protects most
stations. However, the IBOC signal resides within the analog signal of the
first-adjacent station. With the proposed power increase of 10dB, the
potential exists to cause the degradation of analog signals within its 1 mV/m
service contour.[15] [16] [17] [18] Ironically, the National Association of
Broadcasters claims this is not a problem, while at the same time using it as
justification to keep LPFM stations (except its own members' translator
stations) off the air.

## [edit] Comparison to EU's Digital Radio

### [edit] FM HD Radio versus DAB

Some European Union countries have implemented Eureka-147 Digital Audio
Broadcasting (DAB), with compatible radios having been available since 1999.
This system has also been implemented in a limited number of Canadian markets.
DAB broadcasts a single station that is approximately 1500 kilohertz in width
(~1000 kilobits per second). That station is then subdivided into multiple
digital streams of between 9 and 12 programs. In order to implement DAB, it
was necessary for the European Telecommunications organization to set aside a
new range of frequencies, whereas FM HD Radio shares its digital broadcast
with the traditional 200 kilohertz-wide channels, mixing incompatible digital
and analog signals into the same spectrum.

In the UK, Denmark, Norway and Switzerland, which are the leading countries
with regard to implementing DAB, the first-generation MPEG-1 Audio Layer II
(MP2) codec stereo radio stations on DAB have a lower sound-quality than FM,
prompting a number of complaints.[19] The typical bandwidth for DAB programs
is only 128 kbit/s using the first generation, less-robust MP2 codec which
requires at least double that rate to be considered near-CD quality. For
comparison, the HD Radio standard assigns up to 300 kbit/s for each individual
FM station, using a proprietary iBiquity HDC codec, derived from MPEG-4 HE-
AAC, which can provide perceived CD quality as low as 64 kbit/s, or 5.1
surround at higher rates.[20][21] In order to address this flaw the new DAB+
will also use MPEG-4, however this will require all current customers to
acquire new DAB+ units.

A directly-related issue with DAB's original inefficient compression is
"downgrading" stations from stereophonic to monaural, in order to include more
channels into the limited 1000 kbit/s bandwidth,[22] smaller coverage of
markets as compared to analog FM, radios that are overly expensive, poor
reception inside vehicles or buildings, and a general lack of interest in DAB
(only 5 million units sold in the largest take up area of UK by mid-2007).[23]
HD Radio shares most of these same flaws (see criticisms below).

#### [edit] AM HD Radio versus DRM

The European Union states are in the process of rolling-out Digital Radio
Mondiale (DRM), with compatible radios already available for sale. DRM is very
similar to AM HD Radio in that each station is broadcast via a channel 20
kilohertz wide (+/-10 kHz), and the radio is hand-tuned to each individual
station's location on the dial. The two standards also share the same
modulation scheme (COFDM), codecs based upon MPEG-4 AAC, and like HD Radio DRM
allows broadcasters multiple options:

  * Hybrid mode (digital/analog) â 10 kHz analog plus 5 KHz digital bandwidth allows 5-16 kbit/s â (HDR is 20-40 kbit/s)
  * 10 KHz digital-only bandwidth (equal to one-half of one channel) allows 12-35 kbit/s â (HDR is 20-40 kbit/s)
  * 20 KHz digital-only bandwidth (equal to one channel with both sidebands) allows 24-72 kbit/s â (HDR is 40-60 kbit/s)

Actual DRM bit rates vary depending on day versus night transmission
(groundwave versus skywave) and desired robustness. For AM stations DRM offers
a growth path for broadcasters. Unfortunately DRM shares many of the same
flaws as DAB and HD Radio technology: Shorter broadcast distance as compared
to analog AM signal when in hybrid mode; poor reception inside vehicles and
buildings; and interference with adjacent channels (though in all-digital mode
the signal fits inside the designated channel mask).

## [edit] Criticisms

### [edit] Awareness, coverage

There is low awareness among consumers, and even lower uptake. According to a
survey dated August 8, 2007 by Bridge Ratings, when asked the question, "Would
you buy an HD radio in the next two months?" only 1.0% responded "yes".[24]
Some broadcast engineers have also expressed distrust or dislike of the new
system.[25][26] Also, a survey conducted in September 2008 saw a small
percentage still confused HD radio with satellite radio.[27]

Most of the first-generation HD Radio tuners have been noted as being very
insensitive, making reception problematic. The HD Radio signal is 20 dBW below
(one percent the power of) a station's analog signal. In addition it has been
noted that the analog section of some tuners displays poor reception
capabilities compared to older non-digital models.[28]

#### [edit] Proprietary and incompatible

Even though DAB and DRM standards are open-standards and pre-date HD-Radio,
HD-Radios cannot be used to receive these stations when sold or moved
overseas. The HD Radio system is a different digital broadcasting standard
than those previously adopted in other countries. The lack of a common
standard means that HD Radios cannot receive DAB format broadcasts of other
countries and vice-versa, and that manufacturers must develop separate
products for different countries, which typically are not dual-format. Whereas
the AAC (Advanced Audio Coding) family of codecs are publicly documented
standards, the HDC codec exists only within the HD Radio system, and is an
iBiquity trade secret. Similarly DRM and DAB are open specifications, while
iBiquity's HD Radio specification is partly open but mostly private.[29]

#### [edit] Reduced-quality concerns

Promotion for HD Radio does not always make clear that some of its
capabilities are mutually incompatible with other of its capabilities. For
example, the FM system has been described as "CD quality;" however, the FM
system also allows multiplexing the data stream between two or more separate
programs. A program utilizing one half or less of the data stream does not
attain the higher audio quality of a single program allowed the full data
stream. The FCC has declared "one free over-the-air digital stream [must be]
of equal or greater quality than the stationâs existing analog signal".[30]
(If the FCC discontinues analog simulcasting, each station will have over 300
kbit/s bandwidth available, allowing for CD or even Surround Sound-quality
audio together with multiple sub-channels.)

Another such conflict arises from the extra "free" programs available today.
The broadcasting industry is seeking FCC approval for conditional access, that
is, enabling the extra programs to be available only by paid subscription (on
future models of HD Radio). Conditional access will also enable special
services for the blind (such as radio reading services) and hearing
impaired.[31] NDS, a maker of digital media encryption technology, has a deal
with iBiquity to provide HD Radio with an encrypted content-delivery system
called RadioGuard.[32] NDS claims that RadioGuard will "provide additional
revenue-generating possibilities".

#### [edit] Reduced analog signal

Radio stations are licensed in the United States to broadcast at a specific
effective radiated power level. Adding HD Radio technology reduces the amount
of power available for the analog portion to 99%, to make room for the 1%
level digital broadcast. NPR Labs recently did a study of predicted HD radio
operation if power levels were increased to 10% of maximum power, and found
the digital signal would increase RF interference on FM. However the boosted
digital HD signal coverage would then exceed analog coverage, with 17% more
population covered.[33]

#### [edit] Extremely high cost

The costs of installing the proprietary system, including a one-time license
fee, prohibits all but the most well-off public radio (NCE) stations from
installing the system. Large companies in larger media markets (such as Clear
Channel or Citadel Broadcasting) can afford to implement the technology for
their stations. Current HD Radio receivers cost anywhere from around 50 to
several hundred dollars (US), compared to regular FM radios which can even be
found at dollar stores. By contrast, all of the R&D work for DAB (and much of
DAB+) had already been done, and requires no licensing fees, thus the entire
DAB system is cheaper for broadcasters and listeners. FMeXtra is even less
expensive, and requires no installation labor or cost for the broadcaster,
other than plugging it into the transmitter. It also requires no FCC approval,
coming under a station's subsidiary communications authority. However, other
digital broadcast technologies have not been approved for use in the United
States, leaving no alternative.

## [edit] Programming

Currently the HD Digital Radio Alliance, a consortium of major owners such as
ABC, CBS, and ClearChannel, is acting as a liaison for stations to choose
unduplicated formats for the extra channels (HD2, HD3, etc.). This is designed
to provide additional choices for listeners instead of several stations all
independently deciding to create the same format. HD1 stations broadcast the
same format as the regular FM (and some AM) stations, and most of these
stations offer an HD2 subchannel to complement their current programming.

Clear Channel is selling programming of several different music genres to
other competing stations, in addition to airing them on its own stations. Some
stations are simulcasting their local AM or lower-power FM broadcasts on
sister stations' HD2 channels. It is common practice to broadcast an older,
discontinued format on HD2 channels, such as WPGB in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
which carries its former smooth jazz format on its HD2 band. Other recent
additions include introduction of air staff on HD2 stations, like KDWB's Party
Zone channel in Minneapolis-Saint Paul. Some HD2 or HD3 stations are even
simulcasting sister AM stations, such as KTMY in Centerville, Utah
simulcasting sister station KNRS 570\. KBCO in Boulder, Colorado uses it's HD2
channel to broadcast exclusive live recordings from their private recording
studio.

### [edit] Translators

Although broadcast translators are prohibited from originating their own
programming, the FCC has allowed stations to ignore this by having their
programming simulcast on an HD Radio channel of the primary station the
translator is assigned to. This also allows station owners, who already
usually own multiple stations locally and nationally, to circumvent the
rulemaking process of changing the table of allotments to get a new station,
and to avoid ownership caps intended to prevent the excessive concentration of
media ownership. These also block new LPFM stations from going on the air, and
are allowed much greater broadcast range (height and power) than locally-
originated LPFMs.

For translators used for their original intent (to retransmit the primary
station unmodified to distant areas with poor reception), HD Radio may be
passed along from the main station via a "bent pipe" setup, where the
translator simply makes a frequency shift of the entire channel, often with an
intermediate frequency. Translators which use a separate receiver and
transmitter also require a separate HD Radio transmitter, just as the main
station. Translators are not required to pass-through HD Radio at all.

## [edit] Receivers

### [edit] Automotive and Home/Professional

Receivers are becoming less expensive, starting at around US$100\.
Manufacturers have initially focused on making car stereos. In 2008, Ford
Motor Company became the first U.S. automaker to feature HD Radio tuners in
its vehicles; and beginning with the 2009 model year, Ford will offer HD Radio
tuners as a factory-installed option (Compatible with SYNC).[34] BMW offers
Factory-Installed HD Radio on nearly all 2008+ models. Hyundai offers factory-
installed HD Radio on the Genesis 2008+ model year. Mercedes-Benz offers
factory-installed HD Radio on the R320, ML320 and GL320 models (2009 model
year). MINI offers factory-installed HD Radio on the Cooper, Cooper S (2008+
model year). Scion offers HD Radio on select audio systems. Volvo offers
factory-installed HD Radio on the S40 T5, V50 T5, C30, C70, S80, V70, XC70 and
XC90 models (2009 model year).

A short list of HD Radio automotive receiver manufacturers include Alpine
Electronics, Directed Electronics, Dual, Insignia, Jensen, JVC, Kenwood,
Pioneer, Sony, and Visteon.

Home and office listening equipment is currently available from several
companies, in both component tuner and tabletop models, including Audio Design
Associates, Boston Acoustics, Cambridge Soundworks, Day Sequerra, Denon, DICE
Electronics, Directed Electronics, Insignia, Jensen Electronics, LG, Marantz,
Onkyo, Polk Audio, Radiosophy, Radio Shack, Rotel, Sangean, Sony, Visteon,
Yamaha.

### [edit] Portable

Until now, portable HD Radio receivers have been unavailable because the
chipsets needed by this technology required too much power to be practical for
a battery-operated device. However, in January 2008 at the Consumer
Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas iBiquity unveiled a prototype of a new
portable receiver, roughly the size of a cigarette pack.

It is based on a new chipset developed by Samsung. Although portable, it is
still a relatively power-hungry device (it will run out an average set of
alkaline batteries in about two hours, according to an iBiquity engineer). But
Samsung engineers at CES say a second-generation chipset due in 2009 will be
about 40 percent more power efficient and then a third-generation chipset due
about a year later will use even less energy. According to iBiquity, Sony and
others have expressed an interest in using the first-generation chipset and
that the first portable HD Radios could have been, but were not ultimately, on
the retail market in the USA as early as Christmas 2008. The new Coby HDR-700
will be the first HD Radio to be self (battery) powered via its built in
rechargeable battery pack. This will make it the first fully portable HD
Radio.[citation needed]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b "iBiquity Digital Corporation". http://www.ibiquity.com. Retrieved on 2008-11-17.
  2. ^ a b Dortch, Marlene H. (2002-10-11). "Digital Audio Broadcasting Systems and Their Impact on the Terrestrial Radio Broadcast Service" (PDF)., Federal Communication Commission. Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  3. ^ Tucker, Ken (2007-03-22). "FCC approves HD Radio Rules". Mediaweek (Nielsen Business Media). http://www.mediaweek.com/mw/news/tvstations/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1003561802. Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  4. ^ iBiquity Digital Corporation - IBOC White Papers
  5. ^ "Latest Releases". National Radio Systems Committee. http://www.nrscstandards.org/. Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  6. ^ "Facts About HD Radio Broadcaster Licensing". iBiquity Digital Corporation. http://www.ibiquity.com/broadcasters/licensing/technology_license. Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  7. ^ "Terrestrial Digital Radio". Consumer Electronics Association. http://www.ce.org/Press/CEA_Pubs/2068.asp. Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  8. ^ "Becoming an HD Radio IP Licensee". iBiquity Digital Corporation. http://www.ibiquity.com/manufacturers/receiver_manufacturers/license_agreement. Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  9. ^ "How does HD Digital Radio Sound?". HD Digital Radio. http://www.hdradio.com/how_does_hd_digital_radio_sound.php. Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  10. ^ "SBR explained". Dolby. Coding Technologies. http://www.codingtechnologies.com/products/sbr.htm. Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  11. ^ (2007-11-20). "Night of the Bees". (Web link). Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  12. ^ MP3 sample of the interference: IBOC Observations Soundclip
  13. ^ "Stations in Maryland broadcasting on HD Signals". iBiquity Digital Corporation. http://www.ibiquity.com/hd_radio/hdradio_find_a_station?state=MD&sortBy=undefined&thisBeColorOver=ff920f&thisBeColorOut=11839d#stationlist. Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  14. ^ "NAB Will Ask FCC to Up FM IBOC Power". Radio World (NewBay Media). 2008-02-01. http://www.radioworld.com/pages/s.0100/t.11018.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  15. ^ Veriner, Doug (2006). "IBOC Coverage and InterferenceIBOC Coverage and Interference" (PDF).. Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  16. ^ (2005-08-16). "HD Radio - Less choice more noise!". (Web link). Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  17. ^ "Feature: Going Digital - The End of Radio As We Know It". DIY Media. 2002-01-03. http://www.diymedia.net/feature/fdigital2.htm. Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  18. ^ (July 2008). "FM-HD 10db Power Increase". (Web link). Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  19. ^ Holm, Steve (2007). "Lydkvalitetet i DAB digitalradio". Digitale Utgivelser ved UiO. http://wo.uio.no/as/WebObjects/theses.woa/wa/these?WORKID=52348. Retrieved on 2009-01-03. (Norwegian)
  20. ^ Robinson, David J. M. (2002-07-09). "DAB sound quality". OFCOM: Regulation in digital broadcasting: DAB digital radio bitrates and audio quality; Dynamic range compression and loudness. http://www.david.robinson.org/commsbill/#1_2_3. Retrieved on 2009-01-03.
  21. ^ Kozamernik, Franc (June 2003). "EBU subjective listening tests on low-bitrate audio codecs" (PDF)., EBU * UER. Retrieved on 2009-01-03.
  22. ^ "Mono is the new stereo on national DAB". digitalradiotech.co.uk. 2006-12-15. http://www.digitalradiotech.co.uk/articles/Mono-is-the-new-stereo-on-national-DAB.php. Retrieved on 2009-01-03.
  23. ^ "DAB radio sales top 5m". Digital TV Group. Lovelace Consulting. 2007-06-18. http://www.dtg.org.uk/news/news.php?class=search&subclass=dab&id=2503. Retrieved on 2008-02-18.
  24. ^ "HD Radio vs. Internet Radio: Which is Radio's Future?". Bridge Ratings. 2007-08-08. http://www.bridgeratings.com/press_08.08.07.HDvsInternet.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-03.
  25. ^ "WYSL ENGINEERING WISDOM, AND OPINION: WHY YOU DON'T NEED, OR WANT, "HD-AM" RADIO". WYSL 1040 AM (Radio Livingston Ltd.). http://www.wysl1040.com/?pg=nohd. Retrieved on 2009-01-03.
  26. ^ Savage, Bob. "End The Radio Engineering Scourge That Could Mean Doom To AM Radio". Stop IBOC Now!. http://www.stopiboc.com/. Retrieved on 2009-01-03.
  27. ^ Saghir, Ryan (2008-09-12). "HD Radio awareness is up... so what?". Orbitcast. http://www.orbitcast.com/archives/hd-radio-awareness-is-up-so-what.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-03.
  28. ^ Menta, Richard (2007-03-24). "HD Radio Undermined by Weak Tuners". http://www.mp3newswire.net/stories/7002/hd-radio2.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-03.
  29. ^ "Petition for Reconsideration of Jonathan E. Hardis (Before U.S. FCC)". 2007-07-09. http://gullfoss2.fcc.gov/prod/ecfs/retrieve.cgi?native_or_pdf=pdf&id_document=6519550109. Retrieved on 2007-10-29.
  30. ^ "Second Report & Order (U.S. FCC)" (PDF). 2007-05-31. http://fjallfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-07-33A1.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-29.
  31. ^ "NPR, Harris Corporation and Towson University Launch Global Effort To Make Radio Accessible to Hearing and Sight Impaired". Harris Corporation. 2008-01-08. http://www.ibiquity.com/i/NPR_HARRIS.doc. Retrieved on 2009-01-03.
  32. ^ Pizzi, Skip (2007-09-01). "Subscription Radio Gets Real". Radio World. http://www.rwonline.com/pages/s.0054/t.8141.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-03.
  33. ^ Behrens, Steve (2008-09-02). "More power for HD Radio, more buzz on analog". Current. http://www.current.org/tech/tech0815hdradio.shtml. Retrieved on 2009-01-03.
  34. ^ "Ford to Offer Factory-Installed HD Radio Technology on Ford, Lincoln and Mercury Vehicles in 2009". HD Radio: The Buzz. 2008-01-07. http://www.hdradio.com/the_buzz.php?thebuzz=257. Retrieved on 2009-01-03.

## [edit] External links

  * HD Radio official site
  * iBiquity
  * U.S. Federal Communications Commission IBOC Page

v â¢ d â¢ e

Analog and digital audio broadcasting  
Terrestrial  
Radio modulation

AM Â· FM Â· COFDM  
Frequency allocations

LW Â· MW (MF) Â· SW (HF) Â· VHF Â· L band  
Digital systems

DAB/DAB+ Â· DRM/DRM Plus Â· HD Radio Â· FMeXtra Â· CAM-D Â· ISDB-TSB  
Satellite  
Frequency allocations

L band Â· S band Â· Ku band  
Digital systems

SDR Â· DVB-SH Â· DAB-S Â· DMB-S Â· ADR  
Commercial radio providers

1worldspace Â· Sirius (Canada) Â· XM (Canada) (see also: Sirius XM)  
Codecs | Hidden signals  
AAC Â· HE-AAC Â· MPEG-1 Layer II Â· AMR-WB+ | AMSS Â· DirectBand Â· PAD Â·
RDS/RBDS Â· SCA/SCMO  
Related topics  
Technical: Audio processing Â· Audio data compression Â· Digital radio Â·
Error correction Â· Multipath propagation  
Cultural: History of radio Â· International broadcasting  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HD_Radio"

Categories: Broadcast engineering | Digital radio | Data

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since April 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Nederlands

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 22 April 2009, at 06:11 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



