
# Alternative energy

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Offshore wind turbines near Copenhagen

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Coal as an alternative to wood
    * 1.2 Petroleum as an alternative to whale oil
    * 1.3 Alcohol as alternative to fossil fuels
    * 1.4 Coal gasification as alternative to expensive petroleum
  * 2 Recent forms
    * 2.1 Ecologically friendly alternatives
    * 2.2 Zero carbon alternatives
    * 2.3 Energy independence alternatives
  * 3 Alternative energy in transportation
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
Alternative energy is an umbrella term that refers to any source of usable
energy intended to replace fuel sources without the undesired consequences of
the replaced fuels[1]. Typically, official uses of the term, such as
qualification for governmental incentives, exclude fossil fuels and nuclear
energy[2][3][4] whose undesired consequences are high carbon dioxide
emissions, the major contributing factor of global warming according to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and difficulties of radioactive
waste disposal. Over the years, the nature of what was regarded alternative
energy sources has changed considerably, and today because of the variety of
energy choices and differing goals of their advocates, defining some energy
types as "alternative" is highly controversial.

The term "alternative" presupposes a set of undesirable energy technologies
against which "alternative energies" are opposed. As such, the list of energy
technologies excluded is an indicator of what problems that the alternative
technologies are intended to address. Controversies regarding dominant forms
of energy and their alternatives have a long history.

## [edit] History

Historians of economies have studied the key transitions to alternative
energies and regard the transitions as pivotal in bringing about significant
economic change.[5][6][7] Prior to shift to an alternative energy, supplies of
the dominant energy type became erratic, accompanied by rapid increases in
energy prices.

#### [edit] Coal as an alternative to wood

Historian Norman F. Cantor describes how in the late medieval period, coal was
the new alternative fuel to save the society from overuse of the dominant
fuel, wood:

    "Europeans had lived in the midst of vast forests throughout the earlier medieval centuries. After 1250 they became so skilled at deforestation that by 1500 AD they were running short of wood for heating and cooking... By 1500 Europe was on the edge of a fuel and nutritional disaster, [from] which it was saved in the sixteenth century only by the burning of soft coal and the cultivation of potatoes and maize."[8]
#### [edit] Petroleum as an alternative to whale oil

Whale oil was the dominant form of lubrication and fuel for lamps in the early
19th century, but by mid century and the depletion of the whale stocks, whale
oil prices were skyrocketing and could not compete with the newly discovered
source of cheap petroleum from Pennsylvania in 1859.[9]

#### [edit] Alcohol as alternative to fossil fuels

Main article: Ethanol fuel

In 1917, Alexander Graham Bell advocated ethanol alcohol from corn and other
foodstuffs as an alternative to coal and oil, stating that the world was in
measurable distance of depleting these fuels. For Bell, the problem requiring
an alternative was lack of renewability of orthodox energy sources[10].Since
the 1970s, Brazil has had an ethanol fuel program which has allowed the
country to become the world's second largest producer of ethanol (after the
United States) and the world's largest exporter.[11] Brazilâs ethanol fuel
program uses modern equipment and cheap sugar cane as feedstock, and the
residual cane-waste (bagasse) is used to process heat and power.[12] There are
no longer light vehicles in Brazil running on pure gasoline. By the end of
2008 there were 35,000 filling stations throughout Brazil with at least one
ethanol pump.[13]

Cellulosic ethanol can be produced from a diverse array of feedstocks, and
involves the use of the whole crop. This new approach should increase yields
and reduce the carbon footprint because the amount of energy-intensive
fertilisers and fungicides will remain the same, for a higher output of usable
material.[14][15] As of 2008, there are nine commercial cellulosic ethanol
plants which are either operating, or under construction, in the United
States.[16]

#### [edit] Coal gasification as alternative to expensive petroleum

In the 1970s, President Jimmy Carter's administration advocated coal
gasification as an alternative to expensive imported oil. The program,
including the Synthetic Fuels Corporation was scrapped when petroleum prices
plummeted in the 1980s.

## [edit] Recent forms

#### [edit] Ecologically friendly alternatives

Renewable energy sources such as biomass are sometimes regarded as an
alternative to ecologically harmful fossil fuels. Renewables are not
inherently alternative energies for this purpose. For example, the
Netherlands, once leader in use of palm oil as a biofuel, has suspended all
subsidies for palm oil due to the scientific evidence that their use "may
sometimes create more environmental harm than fossil fuels".[17] The
Netherlands government and environmental groups are trying to trace the
origins of imported palm oil, to certify which operations produce the oil in a
responsible manner.[17]Regarding biofuels from foodstuffs, the realization
that converting the entire grain harvest of the US would only produce 16% of
its auto fuel needs, and the decimation of Brazil's CO2 absorbing tropical
rain forests to make way for biofuel production has made it clear that placing
energy markets in competition with food markets results in higher food prices
and insignificant or negative impact on energy issues such as global warming
or dependence on foreign energy.[18] Recently, alternatives to such
undesirable sustainable fuels are being sought, such as commercially viable
sources of cellulosic ethanol.

#### [edit] Zero carbon alternatives

From the perspective of the climate change issue, low carbon economy fuels are
alternative sources that eliminate carbon and methane emissions. For this
goal, renewable or sustainable energies such as biomass combustion, and
hydrogen derived from natural gas do not present viable alternatives because
they do not aggressively confront global net carbon increases. Both nuclear
power and carbon capture and storage techniques such as clean coal technology
are low carbon emission alternative energy technologies but are reviled by
other "alternative energy" advocates who argue that these energies do not
provide an alternative to harming the environment.[citation needed]

#### [edit] Energy independence alternatives

In Europe, there is a desire to be more independent of Russia supplied
energy[19], and in the US, there is a desire to be independent from petroleum
produced in countries that often are hostile to US interests. From this
perspective, domestic natural gas, a fossil fuel, is an alternative energy to
use of foreign petroleum as a transportation fuel. This is the point of view
of T. Boone Pickens as described in his Pickens plan for energy independence,
and is reflected in legislation for the state of Florida[20]. Although natural
gas is not renewable, it is regarded as an alternative energy from this point
of view.

## [edit] Alternative energy in transportation

Due to steadily rising gas prices in 2008 with the US national average price
per gallon of regular unleaded gas rising above $4.00 at one point,[21] there
has been a steady movement towards developing higher fuel efficiency and more
alternative fuel vehicles for consumers. In response, many smaller companies
have rapidly increased research and development into radically different ways
of powering consumer vehicles. While Hybrid Vehicles (such as Toyota's Prius)
and Electric Vehicles (such as the Tesla Roadster) are commercially available,
other technologies such as fuel cells, flywheels, and ultracapacitors are
starting to emerge as viable options.[22]

## [edit] See also

  * Association for the Study of Peak Oil and Gas (ASPO)
  * Alternative Energy Index
  * Energy development
  * Energy storage topics 
    * Alternative fuel vehicle
    * Fuel cell
    * Fischer-Tropsch process
    * Hydrogen economy
  * Green electricity in Australia
  * Green energy
  * Greasestock
  * Renewable energy
  * Sustainable energy

## [edit] References

  1. ^ On site renewable energy options
  2. ^ Alternative Energy Programs: Definitions. United States Department of the Interior. http://www.mms.gov/offshore/AlternativeEnergy/Definitions.htm. Retrieved on 2008-12-14. "Alternative energy: A different type of fuel, not gasoline.".
  3. ^ "MICHIGAN NEXT ENERGY AUTHORITY ACT (EXCERPT) Act 593 of 2002". Michigan Legislature. http://www.legislature.mi.gov/(S(j330pfzek1l2av2zkh3pxa55))/mileg.aspx?page=GetMCLDocument&objectname=mcl-207-822. Retrieved on 2008-12-14.
  4. ^ "Alternative Energy Resources by State". United States Department of Energy EERE. http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/states/alternatives/resources_by_state.cfm. Retrieved on 2008-12-14. Note: Nuclear does not appear as a resource in any states on the DOE EERE site.
  5. ^ Gregory Clark (University of California, Davis, Economics); David Jacks (Simon Fraser University, Economics) (2007-04). "Coal and the Industrial Revolution, 1700-1869" (pdf). European Review of Economic History (European Historical Economics Society). http://gpih.ucdavis.edu/files/Clark_Jacks.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-12-14. Lay summary. Clark and Jacks specifically refer to 18th century "alternative energy"
  6. ^ Dr Roger White, Institute of Archaeology and Antiquity, University of Birmingham (2006-05-13). "Trees and Woods: Myths and Realities" (doc). Lecture: The Essential Role of Forests and Wood in the Age of Iron (Commonwealth Forestry Association). http://www.cfa-international.org/Trees%20and%20Woods%20by%20R%20White.doc. Retrieved on 2008-12-14. Note: Dr. White specifically refers to coal as a 17th century alternative fuel in this paper.
  7. ^ Dr. Douglas B. Reynolds (economics) (doc). Energy Grades and Historic Economic Growth. Hubbert Peak of Oil Production website. http://www.hubbertpeak.com/Reynolds/EnergyGrades.htm. Retrieved on 2008-12-14.
  8. ^ Norman F. Cantor (1993). The Civilization of the Middle Ages: The Life and Death of a Civilization. Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0060925536.
  9. ^ "From Old Dartmouth to New Bedford, Whaling Metropolis of the World". Old Dartmouth Historical Society. http://www.whalingmuseum.org/library/old_nb/old_nb_index.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-14.
  10. ^ Alexander Graham Bell (1917). Prizes for the Inventor: Some of the Problems Awaiting Solution. National Geographic Society. p. 133. http://books.google.com/books/pdf/The_National_Geographic_Magazine.pdf?id=qBYSAAAAYAAJ&output=pdf&sig=ACfU3U2uIWshrshwvn-fwtHGhT5lzFHH4A. Retrieved on 2008-12-14. Lay summary. "In relation to coal and oil, the world's annual consumption has become so enormous that we are now actually within measurable distance of the end of the supply. What shall we do when we have no more coal or oil! .... There is, however, one other source of fuel supply which may perhaps this problem of the future. Alcohol makes a beautiful, clean and efficient fuel, and where not intended for human consumption can be manufactured very cheaply ... from corn stalks and in fact from almost any vegetable matter capable of fermentation."
  11. ^ "Industry Statistics: Annual World Ethanol Production by Country". Renewable Fuels Association. http://www.ethanolrfa.org/industry/statistics/#E. Retrieved on 2008-05-02.
  12. ^ Macedo Isaias, M. Lima Verde Leal and J. Azevedo Ramos da Silva (2004). "Assessment of greenhouse gas emissions in the production and use of fuel ethanol in Brazil" (PDF). Secretariat of the Environment, Government of the State of SÃ£o Paulo. http://www.eners.ch/plateforme/medias/macedo_2004.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-05-09.
  13. ^ Daniel Budny and Paulo Sotero, editor (2007-04). "Brazil Institute Special Report: The Global Dynamics of Biofuels" (PDF). Brazil Institute of the Woodrow Wilson Center. http://www.wilsoncenter.org/topics/pubs/Brazil_SR_e3.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-05-03.
  14. ^ Biofuels look to the next generation
  15. ^ Cellulosic Ethanol: Not Just Any Liquid Fuel
  16. ^ Building Cellulose
  17. ^ a b Elisabeth Rosenthal (2007-01-31). Once a Dream Fuel, Palm Oil May Be an Eco-Nightmare. New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/01/31/business/worldbusiness/31biofuel.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-14.
  18. ^ Lester R. Brown (2007-06-13). "Biofuels Blunder:Massive Diversion of U.S. Grain to Fuel Cars is Raising World Food Prices, Risking Political Instability". Testimony before U.S. Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works. http://www.earth-policy.org/Transcripts/SenateEPW07.htm. Retrieved on 2008-12-20.
  19. ^ David Charter (2008-11-13). "Power supergrid plan to protect Europe from Russian threat to choke off energy". London Times. http://business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/business/industry_sectors/natural_resources/article5142622.ece. Retrieved on 2008-11-21.
  20. ^ "Florida House of Representatives 2008 bill HB 1397" (pdf). 2008-03-03. 2, line 49. http://www.flsenate.gov/data/session/2008/House/bills/billtext/pdf/h139700.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-12-12. This bill explicitly lists natural gas as an "alternative energy".
  21. ^ Gas Prices post third straight record, CNN Money.
  22. ^ In A Green World, accessed Jul 2, 2008.

## [edit] External links

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternative_energy"

Categories: Alternative energy

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 21:57.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



