
# Iron Man (film)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Iron Man  
<IMG>  
Theatrical Poster  
Directed by Jon Favreau  
Produced by Avi Arad  
Kevin Feige  
Written by Screenplay:  
John August  
(uncredited)  
Mark Fergus  
Hawk Ostby  
Arthur Marcum  
Matthew Hollaway  
Comic Book:  
Stan Lee  
Larry Lieber  
Don Heck  
Jack Kirby  
Starring Robert Downey Jr.  
Terrence Howard  
Jeff Bridges  
Gwyneth Paltrow  
Leslie Bibb  
Shaun Toub  
Music by Ramin Djawadi  
Cinematography Matthew Libatique  
Editing by Dan Lebental  
Studio Marvel Studios  
Distributed by Paramount Pictures  
Release date(s) May 2, 2008  
Running time 126 min.  
Country United States  
Language English  
Budget $140 million[1]  
Gross revenue $582,030,528[1]  
Followed by Iron Man II  
Iron Man is a 2008 superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character of the
same name. Directed by Jon Favreau, the film stars Robert Downey Jr. as Tony
Stark, a billionaire industrialist and master engineer who builds a powered
exoskeleton and becomes the technologically advanced superhero, Iron Man.
Gwyneth Paltrow plays his personal assistant Pepper Potts, Terrence Howard
plays military liaison James Rhodes and Jeff Bridges plays Stark Industries
executive Obadiah Stane.

The film was in development since 1990 at Universal Studios, 20th Century Fox,
and New Line Cinema, before Marvel Studios reacquired the rights in 2006.
Marvel put the project in production as its first self-financed film. Favreau
signed on as director, aiming for a naturalistic feel, and he chose to shoot
the film primarily in California, rejecting the East Coast setting of the
comics to differentiate the film from numerous superhero films set in New York
City-esque environments. During filming, the actors were free to create their
own dialogue because preproduction was focused on the story and action. Rubber
and metal versions of the armors, created by Stan Winston's company, were
mixed with computer-generated imagery to create the title character.

Marvel Studios and Paramount Pictures, the distributor, planned a $50 million
marketing campaign for the film, which was modeled on Paramount's successful
promotion of Transformers; Hasbro and Sega sold merchandise, and product
placement deals were made with Audi, Burger King, LG and 7-Eleven. Reviews
were mostly positive, particularly praising Downey's performance.[2] Downey,
Favreau and Paltrow will return in the sequel Iron Man II, scheduled for
release on May 7, 2010. Downey also made a cameo appearance as Stark in The
Incredible Hulk.

## Contents

  * 1 Plot
  * 2 Cast
  * 3 Production
    * 3.1 Development
    * 3.2 Filming
    * 3.3 Effects
    * 3.4 Music
  * 4 Release
    * 4.1 Marketing
    * 4.2 Reception
    * 4.3 Box office
    * 4.4 Home media
    * 4.5 Awards
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Plot

Tony Stark (Robert Downey Jr.) gambles at a Las Vegas casino, leaving his
deceased father's friend and business partner, Obadiah Stane (Jeff Bridges),
to accept a prestigious award for him. As Stark leaves the casino with his
entourage, he is approached by reporter Christine Everhart (Leslie Bibb), whom
he charms into a one-night stand at his Malibu house. When she awakens the
next morning, Stark is gone and she is coldly greeted by Pepper Potts (Gwyneth
Paltrow), his personal assistant.

Stark flies off to war-torn Afghanistan with his friend and company military
liaison, Lieutenant Colonel James Rhodes (Terrence Howard), for a
demonstration of Stark Industries' new weapon, the "Jericho" cluster missile.
On the way back, however, his military convoy is attacked. In the firefight,
his escort is wiped out and Stark himself is knocked unconscious by one of his
own company's bombs.

Waking up in an Afghan cave, he discovers an electromagnet embedded in his
chest, placed there by fellow captive Dr. Yinsen (Shaun Toub). Powered by a
car battery, it keeps shrapnel from working its way to his heart and killing
him. Stark has been captured by a terrorist group known as the Ten Rings,
whose leader orders him to build a Jericho missile for him.

Instead, during his three months of captivity, he and Yinsen begin secretly
building a crude suit of armor, powered by a miniature "arc reactor" invented
by Stark's father. Finally, the terrorists grow impatient and give Stark 24
hours to finish. Unfortunately, the deadline expires before the suit is fully
activated, so Yinsen makes a suicidal attack in a desperate bid to buy time.
Once the armor is ready, Stark charges through the caves. Near the entrance, a
dying Yinsen tells him not to waste his life. Forever grateful to Yinsen,
Stark burns all the munitions the terrorists have accumulated and then flies
away, only to crash in the desert. Stark survives, but his suit is in pieces.
After being rescued by Rhodes, Stark announces at a press conference that his
company will no longer manufacture weapons. Stane tells him shortly thereafter
that his decision is being blocked by the board of directors of Stark
Industries.

Stark focuses his energies on building a better version of his power suit,
while making an improved arc reactor for his chest. Potts gives Stark a gift:
his first miniature reactor encased in glass and bearing the inscription,
"Proof that Tony Stark has a heart". During Stark's first public appearance
since his return, he spots Potts wearing a sexy dress and realizes that he has
romantic feelings for his assistant. As they are about to share a kiss, Potts
interrupts by asking for a martini.

While ordering the drinks, Stark is accosted by Everhart, who shows him
pictures of Stark Industries weapons, including Jericho missiles, recently
delivered to insurgents. He realizes that Stane has been supplying both the
Americans and their enemies, and attempting to remove Stark from power.
Enraged, Stark dons the power suit, flies to Afghanistan and rescues a
village. While leaving, Stark attracts the attention of the United States Air
Force, which dispatches two F-22 Raptors to try to identify the mysterious
flying object. Rhodes wants to investigate, but is overruled and the fighters
are ordered to destroy the target. During the resulting dogfight, Stark has
time to call Rhodes to reveal that he is the unidentified target. One of the
planes is accidentally destroyed when it collides with Stark. The pilot
ejects, but his parachute will not deploy, so Stark rescues him before
escaping.

Stark sends Potts to hack into the company computer system. She discovers that
Stane hired the Ten Rings to kill Stark. The group reneged on the deal upon
discovering who the target was. She also learns Stane has recovered the pieces
of the original power suit and reverse-engineered his own version, one much
larger and more powerful than Stark's, but his engineers are unable to
construct a small enough arc reactor to power the suit.

After she leaves, Stane discovers what she has done. He ambushes Stark in his
house, using a Stark Industries device to temporarily paralyze him. While
revealing his plan to take over Stark Industries, Stane removes the arc
reactor from Stark's chest and leaves him to die. However, Stark gets to
Potts' gift and re-installs his first reactor.

Although his original reactor is underpowered for his latest armor, Stark
races to rescue Potts, and a battle erupts between him and Stane. Finding
himself outmatched, Stark lures Stane atop the Stark Industries building. With
no power left, Stark instructs Potts to overload the full-sized reactor in the
building. This unleashes a massive electrical surge that knocks Stane
unconscious and sends him through the ceiling into the reactor itself,
incinerating him.

The next day, the press has dubbed Stark's alter ego "Iron Man". Rhodes gives
reporters a false explanation of what happened. Before speaking, Stark briefly
makes an attempt to establish a romantic relationship with Potts, but is
rejected. During the press conference, Stark starts to tell the cover story
given to him by S.H.I.E.L.D., a government agency, but then announces that he
is Iron Man.

In a post-credits scene, Stark is visited by S.H.I.E.L.D. Director Nick Fury
(Samuel L. Jackson) who notes that Stark is not "the only superhero in the
world" and states he wants to discuss the "Avenger Initiative".

## [edit] Cast

Robert Downey Jr. as Anthony "Tony" Stark / Iron Man: a billionaire
industrialist, genius inventor, and consummate playboy, he is CEO of Stark
Industries, a chief weapons manufacturer for the U.S. military. The son of a
Manhattan Project engineer, Howard Stark, he is an engineering prodigy, having
built a circuit board at four years old and an engine at six, as well as
graduating from MIT summa cum laude at the age of 17. He takes charge of Stark
Industries at the age of 21 from Stane, who had been in control of the company
since Howard's death.

Favreau had planned to cast a newcomer in the role,[3] but ultimately chose
Downey (a fan of the comic)[4] because he felt the actor's past made him an
appropriate choice for the part. "The best and worst moments of Robert's life
have been in the public eye," the director explained. "He had to find an inner
balance to overcome obstacles that went far beyond his career. That's Tony
Stark. Robert brings a depth that goes beyond a comic book character who is
having trouble in high school, or can't get the girl."[4] Favreau also felt
Downey could make Stark a "likable asshole", but also depict an authentic
emotional journey once he won over the audience.[5]

Downey had an office next to Favreau during pre-production, which allowed him
greater involvement in the screenwriting process.[6] He brought a deeper sense
of humor to the film not present in previous drafts of the script.[7] He
explained, "What I usually hate about these [superhero] movies [is] when
suddenly the guy that you were digging turns into Dudley Do-Right, and then
you're supposed to buy into all his 'Let's go do some good!' That Eliot Ness-
in-a-cape-type thing. What was really important to me was to not have him
change so much that he's unrecognizable. When someone used to be a schmuck and
they're not anymore, hopefully they still have a sense of humor."[8] To
prepare, Downey spent five days a week weight training and practiced martial
arts to get into shape,[4] which benefitted him because "it's hard not to have
a personality meltdown [...] after about several hours in that suit. I'm
calling up every therapeutic moment I can think of to just get through the
day."[9]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Howard preparing for the role by riding an F-16 flight simulator

Terrence Howard as Lt. Colonel James "Rhodey" Rhodes: a friend of Stark's, and
the liaison between Stark Industries and the U.S. Air Force in the department
of acquisitions. Favreau cast Howard because he felt he could play War Machine
in a sequel.[10] Howard prepared for the role by visiting Nellis Air Force
Base on March 16, 2007, where he ate with the pilots and observed HH-60 Pave
Hawk rescue helicopters and F-22 Raptors.[11] While Rhodes is roguish in the
comics after he met Stark, his earlier disciplinarian character forms a
dynamic with Stark, and he is unsure whether or not Stark's actions are
acceptable. "Rhodey is completely disgusted with the way Tony has lived his
life, but at a certain point he realizes that perhaps there is a different
way," Howard said. "Whose life is the right way; is it the strict military
life, or the life of an independent?"[9]

Howard and his father are Iron Man fans, partly because Rhodes was one of the
few black superheroes when he was a child.[12] He was a Downey fan since he
saw him in Weird Science, and they competed physically on set: "Robert and his
competitive ass almost tore my shoulder trying to keep up with him. Because
I'm 40 or 50 pounds heavier than him, so I'm in there lifting and I pushed up
about 225 pounds [102 kg] and knocked it out 10 times. Robert wanted to go
about 235 [106 kg], and he did it. So I'm going to push it up to about 245
[111 kg]. I took him out running and gave him some nice cramps. He couldn't
walk after a couple of days."[13]

Jeff Bridges as Obadiah Stane: Stark's business second-in-command. Bridges
read the comics as a boy and liked Favreau's modern, realistic approach. He
shaved his hair and grew a gray beard for the role, which was something he had
wanted to do for some time. Bridges googled the Book of Obadiah, and he was
surprised to learn retribution is a major theme in that particular book of the
Bible, something which Stane represents.[14] Many of Stane's scenes were cut
out to focus more on Stark, but the writers felt Bridges's performance allowed
the application of "less is more".[15] The character was called Iron Monger in
the comics when he used his armor, but the codename is only referenced in the
film when Stane describes himself and Stark as "ironmongers".

Gwyneth Paltrow as Virginia "Pepper" Potts: Stark's personal secretary and
budding love interest. Paltrow asked Marvel to send her any comics that they
would consider relevant to her understanding of the character, whom she
considered to be very smart, levelheaded, and grounded. She said she liked
"the fact that there's a sexuality that's not blatant." Favreau wanted Potts'
and Stark's relationship to be reminiscent of a 1940s comedy, something which
Paltrow considered to be fun in a sexy, yet innocent way.[16]

Shaun Toub as Dr. Yinsen: Stark's fellow captive. In the comics, Yinsen is
Chinese and a physicist, but in the film, he comes from an Afghan village
called Gulmira, which is one of the aspects of the modernization of the Iron
Man mythos for the movie.

Faran Tahir as Raza: the leader of the Ten Rings. Tahir is a fan of the
comics,[14] and wanted to bring humanity to the henchman. "I tried to find
ways to show that although he may be the bad guy, there might be a moment or
just a hint of vulnerability at times, where he hasn't made the right
calculations or there's a certain amount of doubt. Jon was very receptive to
that kind of layering."[17]

Paul Bettany voices Jarvis: Stark's personal Artificial Intelligence computer
program, which assists him in the construction and programming of the Iron Man
suit. The name of the character is a reference to the comic book character
Edwin Jarvis, Stark's butler. Bettany did the part as a favor to Favreau
(having worked with him on Wimbledon) and claimed he did not know what film he
was recording the lines for during his two-hour recording session.[18]

Leslie Bibb as Christine Everhart: A reporter for Vanity Fair.

Clark Gregg appears throughout the film as Agent Coulson of S.H.I.E.L.D.,[19]
and Samuel L. Jackson appears as their head, Nick Fury, following the credits.
Jackson has previously 'appeared' as the version of Nick Fury used in Marvel's
Ultimate Marvel imprint.[20] Other cameos include Iron Man co-creator Stan Lee
(whom Stark mistakes for Hugh Hefner at a party),[21] and director Jon Favreau
as Stark's bodyguard/chauffeur Happy Hogan.[7] Audioslave and Rage Against the
Machine guitarist Tom Morello, who provides additional guitar music for the
film, has a brief cameo as a guard.[22] Jim Cramer, star of CNBC's Mad Money
appeared as himself, commenting on the investment opportunities ("Sell, Sell,
Sell") of Stark Industries.[23] Rapper Ghostface Killah cameoed in a scene
where Stark briefly stays in Dubai while returning to Afghanistan, but it was
cut from the theatrical release for pacing reasons.[24]

## [edit] Production

### [edit] Development

In April 1990, Universal Studios bought the rights to develop Iron Man for the
big screen.[25] Stuart Gordon was to direct Universal's low-budget film.[9] By
February 1996, 20th Century Fox acquired the rights from Universal.[26] In
January 1997, actor Nicolas Cage expressed interest in being cast for the lead
role,[27] and in September 1998, actor Tom Cruise had expressed interest in
producing as well as starring in the film debut of Iron Man.[28] Jeff Vintar
and Iron Man co-creator Stan Lee co-wrote a story which Vintar adapted into a
screenplay. Jeffrey Caine (GoldenEye) rewrote Vintar's script.[29] Director
Quentin Tarantino was approached in October 1999 to write and direct Iron
Man.[30] With no deal made, Fox eventually sold the rights to New Line Cinema
the following December.[31] By July 2000, the film was being written for the
studio[32] by Ted Elliott, Terry Rossio,[29] and Tim McCanlies.[33]
McCanlies's script used the idea of a Nick Fury cameo to set up his own
film.[29] New Line entered talks with Joss Whedon, a fan of the character Iron
Man, in June 2001 for the possibility of the director taking the helm.[34] In
December 2002, McCanlies had turned in a completed script.[35]

"We worked with Michael Crichton's researchers to find a grounded realistic
way to deal with the suit. The idea was he needed the suit to stay alive.
Heâs the same guy we used with Spider-Man 2 to come up with Doc Ock's
inhibitor chips and what the arms are made of and how they work. [...]
Mandarin was an Indonesian terrorist who masqueraded as a rich playboy who
Tony knew."

ââAlfred Gough on his draft for Nick Cassavetes's and New Line's aborted
version[36]  
In December 2004, the studio attached director Nick Cassavetes to the project
for a target 2006 release.[37] After two years of unsuccessful development,
and the deal with Cassavetes falling through, New Line Cinema returned the
film rights to Marvel. Screenplay drafts had been written by Alfred Gough,
Miles Millar and David Hayter, but they were not retained. New Line's script
pitted Iron Man against his father Howard Stark, who becomes War Machine.[38]
In November 2005, Marvel Studios worked to start development from scratch,[39]
and announced it as their first independent feature, as Iron Man was their
only major character not depicted in live action.[6]

In April 2006, Jon Favreau was hired as the film's director, with Arthur
Marcum and Matt Holloway writing the script.[40] Mark Fergus and Hawk Ostby
worked separately, with Favreau compiling both team's scripts,[41] and the
script received a polish by John August.[42] Comic book staff Mark Millar,
Brian Michael Bendis, Joe Quesada, Tom Brevoort, Axel Alonso, and Ralph
Macchio were also summoned by Favreau to give advice on the script.[43]

Favreau had wanted to work with Marvel producer Avi Arad on another film after
the Daredevil adaptation.[6] Favreau celebrated getting the job by going on a
diet, and lost seventy pounds.[9] The director found the opportunity to create
a politically ambitious "ultimate spy movie" in Iron Man, citing inspiration
from Tom Clancy, James Bond, and RoboCop.[44] Favreau also described his
approach as similar to an independent film, "[i]f Robert Altman had directed
Superman",[6] and also cited Batman Begins as an inspiration.[45] He wanted to
make Iron Man a story of an adult man literally reinventing himself, and
realizing the world is far more complex than he believes.[46] Favreau changed
the Vietnam War origin of the character to Afghanistan, as he did not want to
do a period piece.[10]

Choosing a villain was difficult, because Favreau felt Iron Man's archnemesis,
the Mandarin, would not feel realistic, especially after Mark Millar gave his
opinion on the script.[43] He felt only in a sequel, with an altered tone,
would the fantasy of the Mandarin's rings be appropriate.[47] The decision to
push him into the background is comparable to Sauron in The Lord of the
Rings,[45] or Palpatine in Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.[47] Favreau also
wanted Iron Man to face a giant enemy. The switch from Mandarin to Obadiah
Stane was done after Bridges was cast.[24] Stane was intended to become a
villain in the sequel.[43] The Crimson Dynamo was also a villain in early
drafts in the script.[7] Favreau felt it was important to include intentional
inside references for fans of the comics, such as giving the two fighter jets
that attack Iron Man the call signs of "Whiplash 1" and "Whiplash 2," a
reference to the comic book villain Whiplash, and including Captain America's
shield in Stark's workshop.[48]

### [edit] Filming

<IMG>

<IMG>

The top half of this freely licensed image of the interior of the Vehicle
Assembly Building was utilized in a shot of Stark and Stane at the
presentation for Stark's award

Production was based in the former Hughes Company soundstages in Playa Vista,
Los Angeles, California.[49] Favreau rejected the East Coast setting of the
comic books as many superhero films were set there, and he wanted to avoid
repetition in his film.[10] Hughes was one of the inspirations for the comic
book, and the filmmakers acknowledged the coincidence that they would film
Iron Man creating the flying Mark III where the Hughes H-4 Hercules "Spruce
Goose" was built.[14]

Filming began on March 12, 2007,[50] with the first few weeks spent on Stark's
captivity in Afghanistan.[51] The cave where Stark is imprisoned was a 150-200
yard (150-200 m) long set, which was built with movable forks in the caverns
to allow greater freedom for the film's crew.[10] Production designer J.
Michael Riva saw footage of a Taliban fighter in Afghanistan, and saw the cold
breath as he spoke: realizing remote caves are actually very cold, Riva placed
an air conditioning system in the set. He also sought Downey's advice about
make-shift objects in prison, such as a sock being used to make tea. All this
created greater authenticity.[14] Afterwards, Stark's capture was filmed at
Lone Pine, and other exterior scenes in Afghanistan were filmed at Olancha
Sand Dunes. There, the crew had to endure two days of 40 to 60-mile (97 km) an
hour (60 to 100 km/h) winds.[14]

Filming at Edwards Air Force Base began in mid-April,[52] and was completed on
May 2.[53] Exterior shots of Stark's home were digitally composited on footage
of Point Dume in Malibu,[24] while the interior was built at Playa Vista,
where Favreau and Riva aimed to make Stark's home look less futuristic and
more "grease monkey".[14] Filming concluded on June 25, 2007 at Caesar's
Palace in Las Vegas, Nevada.[54] Favreau, a newcomer to action films, remarked
"I'm shocked that I [was] on schedule. I thought that there were going to be
many curveballs." He hired "people who are good at creating action", so "the
human story [felt] like it belongs to the comic book genre".[9]

There was much improvisation in dialogue scenes, because the script was not
completed when filming began (the filmmakers had focused on the story making
sense and planning the action). Favreau acknowledged that improvisation would
make the film feel more natural. Some scenes were shot with two cameras to
capture lines said on the spot. Multiple takes were done, as Downey wanted to
try something new each time.[24] It was Downey's idea to have Stark hold a
news conference on the floor,[9] and he created the speech Stark makes when
demonstrating the "Jericho".[5]

Brian Michael Bendis wrote three pages of dialogue for the Nick Fury cameo
scene, with the filmmakers choosing the best lines for filming.[43] The cameo
was filmed with a skeleton crew in order to keep it a secret, but rumours
appeared on the Internet only days later. Marvel Studios's Kevin Feige
subsequently ordered the scene removed from all preview prints in order to
maintain the surprise and keep fans guessing.[55]

A scene of the inside of the Vehicle Assembly Building at the Kennedy Space
Center utilized a photograph taken by Flickr user Jeremy Keith licensed under
a Creative Commons license, however a studio representative attempted to
demand $1500 USD from the photographer for the right of attribution.[56]

### [edit] Effects

<IMG>

<IMG>

A scale model of the "Iron Monger" suit

Favreau wanted the film to be believable by showing the construction of the
suit in its three stages.[10] Stan Winston, a fan of the comic book, and his
company built metal and rubber versions of the armors. They had previously
worked on Favreau's Zathura.[14] Favreau's main concern with the effects was
whether the transition between the computer-generated and practical costumes
would be too obvious.[57] Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) was hired to create
the bulk of the visual effects with additional work being completed by The
Orphanage and The Embassy; Favreau trusted ILM after seeing Pirates of the
Caribbean: At World's End and Transformers.[14]

The Mark I design was intended to look like it was built from spare parts:
particularly, the back is less armored than the front, as Stark would use his
resources to make a forward attack. It also foreshadows the design of Stane's
armor. A single 90-pound (41 kg) version was built, causing concern when a
stuntman fell over inside it. Both the stuntman and the suit were unscathed.
The armor was also designed to only have its top half worn at times.[14] The
Embassy created a digital version of the Mark I.[58] Stan Winston Studios
built a 10-foot (3.0 m), 800-pound (360 kg) animatronic version of the comic
character "Iron Monger" (Obadiah Stane),[14] a name which Obadiah Stane calls
Tony Stark and himself earlier in the film, but is never actually used for the
suit itself. The animatronic required five operators for the arm, and was
built on a gimbal to simulate walking.[14] A scale model was used for the
shots of it being built.[24]

The Mark II resembles an airplane prototype, with visible flaps.[24] Iron Man
comic book artist Adi Granov designed the Mark III with illustrator Phil
Saunders.[59] Granov's designs were the primary inspiration for the film's
design, and he came on board the film after he recognized his work on Jon
Favreau's MySpace page.[45] Saunders streamlined Granov's concept art, making
it stealthier and less cartoonish in its proportions.[14] Sometimes, Downey
would only wear the helmet, sleeves and chest of the costume over a motion
capture suit.[14] For shots of the Mark III flying, it was animated to look
realistic by taking off slowly, and landing quickly. To generate shots of Iron
Man and the F-22 Raptors battling, cameras were flown in the air to provide
reference for physics, wind and frost on the lenses.[60] For further study of
the physics of flying, skydivers were filmed in a vertical wind tunnel.[61]

Phil Saunders created concept art for the War Machine armor and said that it
was originally intended to be used in the film but was "cut from the script
about halfway through pre-production." Saunders said that the War Machine
armor "was going to be called the Mark IV armor and would have been weaponized
swap-out parts that would be worn over the original Mark III armor," and that
it "would have been worn by Tony Stark in the final battle sequence."[62]

### [edit] Music

See also: Iron Man (soundtrack)

Composer Ramin Djawadi is an Iron Man fan, and still has issues of the comic
from the late 1970s. While he normally composes after watching an assembly
cut, Djawadi began work after seeing the teaser trailer. Favreau clearly
envisioned a focus on "heavy" guitar in the score, and Djawadi composed the
music on that instrument before arranging it for orchestra. The composer said
Downey's performance inspired the several Iron Man themes (for his different
moods), as well as Stark's playboy leitmotif. Djawadi's favorite of the Iron
Man themes is the "kickass" because of its "rhythmic pattern that is a hook on
its own. Very much like a machine." The other themes are "not so much
character based, but rather plot based that carry you through the movie".[63]
Guitarist Tom Morello of Rage Against the Machine and Audioslave, who has a
brief cameo in the film as a guard, contributed additional guitar work to the
movie's soundtrack.

## [edit] Release

<IMG>

<IMG>

Downey promoting the film in Mexico City

The premiere was held at the Greater Union theater at George Street, Sydney,
on April 14, 2008.[64] The film was released worldwide except for Japan
between April 30 and May 7, 2008, with Japan to receive the film in September
2008.[65]

### [edit] Marketing

Marvel and Paramount modeled their marketing campaign for Iron Man on that of
Transformers.[66] Sega released a video game based on the film, which included
other iterations of the character.[67] A 30-second spot for the film aired
during a Super Bowl XLII break.[68] 6,400 7-Eleven stores in the United States
helped promote the film, and LG Group also made a deal with Paramount.[66]
Hasbro created figures of armors from the film, as well as Titanium Man (who
appears in the video game) and the armor from the World War Hulk comics.[69]

Worldwide, Burger King and Audi promoted the film. Jon Favreau was set to
direct a commercial for the fast-food chain, as Michael Bay did for
Transformers.[66] In the film, Tony Stark drives an Audi R8, and also has an
"American cheeseburger" from Burger King after his rescue from Afghanistan, as
part of the studio's product placement deal with the respective companies.
Three other vehicles, the Audi S6 sedan, Audi S5 sports coupe and the Audi Q7
SUV, also appear in the film.[70] Audi created a tie-in website, as General
Motors did for Transformers.[66] Oracle Corporation also promoted the film on
its site.[71] Estimates for the cost of marketing Iron Man ranged from US$50
to $75 million.[72]

### [edit] Reception

Iron Man received highly positive reviews from film critics. On May 1, 2008,
the film was identified as the "best-reviewed film of the year so far" by Jen
Yamato of review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, with the site reporting that 93%
of critics had given the film positive reviews, based upon 218 reviews and
this rating has held its place as of November 2008.[2][73] At Metacritic,
which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream
critics, the film has received an average score of 79, based on 38
reviews.[74]

Among the major trade journals, Todd McCarthy in Variety called the film an
"expansively entertaining special effects extravaganza" with "fresh energy and
stylistic polish",[75] while Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter praised
the film while nonetheless finding "disappointment [in] a climatic [sic]
battle between different Iron Man prototypes [...] how did Tony's nemesis
learn how to use the suit?"[76] In one of the first major-daily newspaper
reviews, Frank Lovece of Newsday lauded the film's "emotional truth [...]
pitch-perfect casting and plausibly rendered super-science" that made it
"faithful to the source material while updating it â and recognizing what's
made that material so enduring isn't just the high-tech cool of a man in a
metal suit, but the human condition that got him there".[77] A.O. Scott of the
New York Times called the film "an unusually good superhero picture. Or at
least â since it certainly has its problems â a superhero movie thatâs
good in unusual ways."[78]

Among the specialty press, Garth Franklin of Dark Horizons commended the
"impressive sets and mechanics that combine smoothly with relatively seamless
CG", and said, "Robert Downey Jr., along with director Jon Favreau [...] help
this rise above formula. The result is something that, whilst hardly original
or groundbreaking, is nevertheless refreshing in its earnestness to avoid dark
dramatic stylings in favor of an easy-going, crowd-pleasing action movie with
a sprinkle of anti-war and redemption themes".[79] IGNâs Todd Gilchrist
recognized Downey as "the best thing" in a film that "functions on autopilot,
providing requisite story developments and character details to fill in this
default 'origin story' while the actors successfully breathe life into their
otherwise conventional roles".[80]

Among major metropolitan weeklies, David Edelstein of New York magazine called
the film "a shapely piece of mythmaking [...] Favreau doesn't go in for
stylized comic-book frames, at least in the first half. He gets real with it
â youâd think you were watching a military thriller",[81] while
conversely, David Denby of The New Yorker put forth a negative review,
claiming "a slightly depressed, going-through-the-motions feel to the entire
show [...] Gwyneth Paltrow, widening her eyes and palpitating, can't do much
with an antique role as Stark's girl Friday, who loves him but can't say so;
Terrence Howard, playing a military man who chases around after Stark, looks
dispirited and taken for granted".[82]

Roger Ebert and Richard Corliss named Iron Man as among their favorite films
of 2008.[83][84]

### [edit] Box office

In its opening weekend, Iron Man grossed $98,618,668 in 4,105 theaters in the
United States and Canada, ranking number one at the box office,[85][86] giving
it the 11th-biggest opening weekend,[87] ninth widest release in terms of
theaters,[88] and the third highest-grossing opening weekend of 2008 behind
Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull and The Dark Knight. It
grossed $35.2 million on its first day, giving it the 13th-biggest opening
day.[89] Iron Man had the second-best premiere for a non-sequel, behind
Spider-Man. It had the fourth-biggest opening for a superhero movie.[90] Iron
Man was also the number-one film in the United States and Canada in its second
weekend, grossing $51.1 million,[85] giving it the 12th-best second weekend
and the fifth-best for a non-sequel.[91] On June 18, 2008 Iron Man became the
first movie of 2008 to pass the $300 million mark for the domestic box
office.[92][93]

As of February 5, 2009, Iron Man has grossed $582,030,528 worldwide â
$318,412,101 in the United States and Canada and $263,618,427 in other
territories.[1]

### [edit] Home media

The film was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc on September 30, 2008, in North
America. In Europe, the scheduled release date was October 27, 2008.[94] The
image on the newspaper Stark reads before he announces he is Iron Man was
altered because amateur photographer Ronnie Adams filed a lawsuit against
Paramount and Marvel using his on-location spy photo in the scene.[95]

A Wal-Mart-exclusive release included a preview of Iron Man: Armored
Adventures.[96] DVD sales were very impressive, grossing $93 million in the
first week of release.[97] As of October 31, 2008, DVD sales (not including
Blu-ray) have accumulated total sales of $129,239,671.[98]

### [edit] Awards

Iron Man was nominated for the Academy Awards for Best Visual Effects and Best
Sound Editing at the 81st Academy Awards, but lost to The Curious Case of
Benjamin Button and The Dark Knight, respectively.[99][100] It was nominated
for Best Film, Best Director, Best Actor, Best Actress, Best Supporting Actor
(for Bridges), Best Writing, Best Music and Best Special Effects at the Saturn
Awards.[101] It was nominated for Favorite Movie at the 2009 Kids' Choice
Awards but lost to High School Musical 3: Senior Year.[102][103]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c "Iron Man (2008)". Box Office Mojo. http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=ironman.htm. Retrieved on 2009-02-05.
  2. ^ a b "Iron Man Movie Reviews". Rotten Tomatoes. IGN Entertainment, Inc. http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/iron_man/. Retrieved on 2008-06-26.
  3. ^ Stax (2006-05-24). "The Unknown Iron Man". IGN. http://uk.movies.ign.com/articles/709/709941p1.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-06.
  4. ^ a b c Bowles, Scott (2007-04-26). "First look: Downey forges a bond with 'Iron Man' role". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/life/movies/news/2007-04-26-iron-man_N.htm?csp=34. Retrieved on 2007-12-13.
  5. ^ a b Allsletter, Rob (2008-03-03). "Iron Man's Jon Favreau". Comics Continuum. http://www.comicscontinuum.com/stories/0803/03/jonfavreau.htm. Retrieved on 2008-03-04.
  6. ^ a b c d Ambrose, Tom (2007-07-26). "The Man In The Iron Mask". Empire. pp. 69.
  7. ^ a b c Hewitt, Chris (April 2008). "Super Fly Guy". Empire. pp. 66â72.
  8. ^ Carroll, Larry (2008-03-18). "'Iron Man' Star Robert Downey Jr. Talks About 'Incredible Hulk' Cameo, Controversial 'Tropic Thunder' Pics". MTV. http://www.mtv.com/movies/news/articles/1583534/story.jhtml. Retrieved on 2008-03-18.
  9. ^ a b c d e f Shapiro, Marc (April 2008). "Pumping Iron". Starlog. pp. 47â50.
  10. ^ a b c d e Quint (2007-02-09). "Quint visits the IRON MAN production offices! Art! Favreau speaks about sequels (?!?), casting and more!!!". Ain't It Cool News. http://www.aintitcool.com/node/31525. Retrieved on 2007-02-10.
  11. ^ Rolfsen, Bruce (2007-03-21). "âIron Manâ pilot to hit big screen". Air Force Times. http://www.airforcetimes.com/news/2007/03/airforce_ironman_070321w/. Retrieved on 2007-03-22.
  12. ^ Worley, Rob M. (2008-04-22). "'Iron Man': Terrence Howard lives the dream". Comics2Films. http://www.comics2film.com/index.php?a=story&b=28467. Retrieved on 2008-04-22.
  13. ^ Rotten, Ryan (2008-04-01). "Iron Man: The Set Visit - Terrence Howard". Superhero Hype!. http://www.superherohype.com/news/featuresnews.php?id=7001. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  14. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "Notes". http://ironmanmovie.marvel.com/. Retrieved on 2008-10-27. Click "About the film" to access.
  15. ^ Shawn Adler (2008-09-30). "âIron Manâ Co-Writers Discuss Their Favorite Deleted Scenes, Plus An Exclusive DVD Bonus Clip". MTV Splash Page. http://splashpage.mtv.com/2008/09/30/iron-man-co-writers-discuss-their-favorite-deleted-scenes-plus-an-exclusive-dvd-bonus-clip/. Retrieved on 2008-10-14.
  16. ^ Douglas, Edward (2008-05-01). "Gwyneth Paltrow Plays Pepper Potts". Superhero Hype!. http://www.superherohype.com/news/topnews.php?id=7150. Retrieved on 2008-05-02.
  17. ^ Spelling, Ian (2008-04-29). "Iron Villain Not Black, White". Sci Fi Wire. http://www.scifi.com/scifiwire/index.php?category=0&id=53090&type=0. Retrieved on 2008-04-29.
  18. ^ Scott Huver (2008-05-16). "Paul Bettany on Voicing Iron Man's Jarvis". Superhero Hype!. http://www.superherohype.com/news/topnews.php?id=7224. Retrieved on 2008-05-17.
  19. ^ "Clark Gregg". The New York Times. http://movies.nytimes.com/person/28638/Clark-Gregg. Retrieved on 2008-05-08.
  20. ^ "Samuel L. Jackson". Copyright Kamal Larsuel, 2005. http://www.samuelljackson.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=36&Itemid=44. Retrieved on August 20 2006.
  21. ^ Goldman, Eric (2007-05-04). "Stan Lee's Further Superhero Adventures". IGN. http://uk.tv.ign.com/articles/785/785824p3.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-14.
  22. ^ "RAGE AGAINST THE MACHINE Guitarist Faces 'Iron Man'". Roadrunner Records. 2008-05-06. http://www.roadrunnerrecords.com/blabbermouth.net/news.aspx?mode=Article&newsitemID=96438. Retrieved on 2008-05-08.
  23. ^ Dellaverson, Carlo (2008-05-02). "Cramer In 'Iron Man'". CNBC. http://www.cnbc.com/id/24427046. Retrieved on 2008-05-08.
  24. ^ a b c d e f Douglas, Edward (2008-04-29). "Exclusive: An In-Depth Iron Man Talk with Jon Favreau". Superhero Hype!. http://www.superherohype.com/news/topnews.php?id=7133. Retrieved on 2008-04-29.
  25. ^ Ryan, James (1990-04-14). "Bam! Pow! Heroes take over the silver screen". Seattle Post-Intelligencer.
  26. ^ Smith, Andrew (1996-02-18). "Gen X kids not bad on screen". The Commercial Appeal.
  27. ^ "Film Clips Column". Journal Gazette. 1997-01-03.
  28. ^ Radford, Bill (1998-09-06). "Big screen gaining new ground as venue for comics creations". The Gazette.
  29. ^ a b c "Iron Man (Archive)". Comics2Film. http://web.archive.org/web/20060503043047/http://www.comics2film.com/IronManArch.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-10-01.
  30. ^ Vice, Jeff (1999-10-03). "Comic books poised for film incarnations". Deseret Morning News.
  31. ^ Smith, Andrew (1999-12-26). "Superheroes lining up for millennium movie debuts". The Commercial Appeal.
  32. ^ Epstein, Warren (2000-07-09). "X-guys could muscle up more Marvelous screen fare". The Gazette.
  33. ^ Richey, Rodney (2000-09-25). "Warner Bros. goes 'Bat' to the Future". Los Angeles Daily News.
  34. ^ Elder, Robert K. (2001-06-01). "All work and lots of slay". Chicago Tribune.
  35. ^ Garcia, Chris (2002-12-06). "A firsthand look at 'Secondhand'". Austin American-Statesman.
  36. ^ Ferrante, Anthony C. (2007-02-15). "Alfred Gough on Smallville, Iron Man and The Mummy 3 - Part 3". http://www.ifmagazine.com/feature.asp?article=1919. Retrieved on 2008-02-02.
  37. ^ "Nick Cassavetes to Direct New Line Cinema and Marvel's Iron Man". New Line Cinema. 2004-12-10. http://www.newline.com/press/2004/1210_ironman.shtml. Retrieved on 2006-07-28.
  38. ^ El Chavo (2006-04-24). "Iron Man by Alfred Gough & Miles Millar, Revisions By David Hayter". Latino Review. http://latinoreview.com/scriptreview.php?id=22. Retrieved on 2008-03-22.
  39. ^ Fritz, Ben (2005-11-02). "Marvel steels itself for 'Iron'". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117932184?categoryid=1236&cs=1. Retrieved on 2006-07-28.
  40. ^ Kit, Borys (2008-04-28). "Marvel Studios outlines slew of superhero titles". The Hollywood Reporter. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/search/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1002424612. Retrieved on 2008-03-22.
  41. ^ Worley, Rob (2006-06-21). "Jon Favreau talks Iron Man". Comics2Film. http://www.comics2film.com/index.php?a=story&b=20520. Retrieved on 2008-03-22.
  42. ^ Jensen, Jeff (2008-04-17). "'Iron Man': Summer's first Marvel?". Entertainment Weekly. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20192634_3,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-21.
  43. ^ a b c d Rich Johnston (2008-05-06). "Lying in the Gutters Volume 2 Column 156". Comic Book Resources. http://www.comicbookresources.com/?page=article&id=16292. Retrieved on 2008-05-06.
  44. ^ "Ultimate Superhero Preview". Empire. 2006-09-29. pp. 90, 230.
  45. ^ a b c Vespe, Eric (2007-07-28). "Quint goes one on one with Jon Favreau about IRON MAN at Comic-Con!!!". Ain't It Cool News. http://www.aintitcool.com/node/33483. Retrieved on 2007-07-29.
  46. ^ Ferris, Glen (2008-04-29). "Empire: Interviews - Jon Favreau Video Interview". Empire Online. http://www.empireonline.com/interviews/interview.asp?IID=756. Retrieved on 2008-05-01.
  47. ^ a b Worley, Rob M. (2007-09-08). "Iron Man: Favreau on films, fans, and Fin Fang Foom". Comics2Film. http://www.comics2film.com/index.php?a=story&b=28481#ad_jump. Retrieved on 2007-08-08.
  48. ^ "Part 2 of Quint's interview with Jon Favreau! IRON MAN 2, Stark's alcoholism, Empire Strikes Back and THE AVENGERS!", Ain't it Cool News, October 29, 2008
  49. ^ Raab, Scott (2007-02-21). "May God Bless and Keep Robert Downey Jr.". Esquire. http://www.esquire.com/features/ESQ0307downeyjr. Retrieved on 2007-02-23.
  50. ^ "Funding Initiated for Iron Man Movie". Superhero Hype!. 2007-02-28. http://www.superherohype.com/news.php?id=5265. Retrieved on 2007-02-28.
  51. ^ Favreau, Jon (2007-03-19). "Jon Favreau on Iron Man filming". Superhero Hype!. http://www.superherohype.com/news.php?id=5362. Retrieved on 2007-03-19.
  52. ^ "Flying with the stars". Edwards Air Force Base. 2007-04-06. http://www.edwards.af.mil/news/story.asp?id=123047810. Retrieved on 2007-04-16.
  53. ^ Miles, Donna (2007-05-02). "Edwards team stars in 'Iron Man' superhero movie". United States Air Force. http://www.af.mil/news/story.asp?id=123051647. Retrieved on 2007-05-14.
  54. ^ Favreau, Jon (2007-06-25). "Iron Man Movie Update!". Comingsoon.net. http://www.superherohype.com/news/topnews.php?id=5916. Retrieved on 2007-06-26.
  55. ^ "Jon Favreau Talks 'Iron Man'". Entertainment Weekly. 2008-05-05. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20198027_3,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-06.
  56. ^ "Iron Man and the Right Not to Be Attributed". Creative Commons blog. Creative Commons. December 8, 2008. http://creativecommons.org/weblog/entry/11118. Retrieved on 2009-03-20.
  57. ^ Rotten, Ryan (2008-04-01). "Iron Man: The Set Visit - Jon Favreau". Superhero Hype!. http://www.superherohype.com/news/featuresnews.php?id=7000. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  58. ^ Andrews, Marke (2008-04-11). "Vancouver's visual effects makers bulk up". The Vancouver Sun. http://www.canada.com/vancouversun/story.html?id=be3cd777-c4b8-4b3e-b6e8-b4fb4220dd3b&k=63189. Retrieved on 2008-04-12.
  59. ^ "Who Designed the Iron Man Suit?". Superhero Hype!. 2007-05-06. http://www.superherohype.com/news/topnews.php?id=5626. Retrieved on 2007-05-06.
  60. ^ Vespe, Eric (2008-04-21). "Quint visits ILM with Jon Favreau and sees some IRON MAN stuff!!". Ain't It Cool News. http://www.aintitcool.com/node/36491. Retrieved on 2008-04-22.
  61. ^ Carolyn Giardina (2008-05-05). "'Iron Man' crew had desired effects". The Hollywood Reporter. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/content_display/technology/news/e3id14e99b005fa29e4b688f4d8117eba76. Retrieved on 2008-05-06.
  62. ^ Iron Man: Official War Machine Concept Art, Peter Sciretta, Slash Film, October 21st, 2008
  63. ^ "Ramin Djawadi" (in Italian). Comicus. 2008-04-06. http://www.comicus.it/view.php?section=interviste&id=165. Retrieved on 2008-04-06.
  64. ^ "Iron Man Aussie Premiere Pics". Superhero Hype!. 2008-04-14. http://www.superherohype.com/news/topnews.php?id=7069. Retrieved on 2008-04-15.
  65. ^ "Iron Man (2008) - Release dates". Internet Movie Database. http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0371746/releaseinfo. Retrieved on 2008-06-21.
  66. ^ a b c d Stanley, T.L. (2008-01-07). "Tie-ins: LG, BK, 7-Eleven To Pump Paramount's Iron Man". Brandweek. http://www.brandweek.com/bw/search/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1003692165. Retrieved on 2008-01-08.
  67. ^ Cordeira, Jim (2006-11-06). "Sega and Marvel hook up for Iron Man". Gaming Age. http://www.gaming-age.com/news/2006/11/6-10. Retrieved on 2006-11-06.
  68. ^ Graser, Marc (2007-12-19). "'Studios suit up for Super Bowl". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117978002.html?categoryid=14&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-12-20.
  69. ^ Douglas, Edward (2008-02-17). "Hasbro Previews G.I. Joe, Hulk, Iron Man, Indy & Clone Wars". SuperHeroHype.com. http://www.superherohype.com/news/topnews.php?id=6807. Retrieved on 2008-02-17.
  70. ^ Graser, Marc (2007-07-25). "'Iron Man' rides with Audi". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117969149.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-07-26.
  71. ^ "Oracle is co-promoting Ironman". http://www.oracle.com/marvel/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-02.
  72. ^ Gorman, Steve (2008-05-03). ""Iron Man" gets heavy start at box office". Reuters. http://www.reuters.com/article/newsOne/idUSN0332150820080503. Retrieved on 2008-05-04.
  73. ^ Jen Yamato (2008-05-01). "Iron Man is the Best-Reviewed Movie of 2008!". Rotten Tomatoes. IGN Entertainment, Inc. http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/iron_man/news/1725305/. Retrieved on 2008-06-21.
  74. ^ "Iron Man (2008): Reviews". Metacritic. CNET Networks, Inc. http://www.metacritic.com/film/titles/ironman. Retrieved on 2008-06-21.
  75. ^ McCarthy, Todd (2008-04-25). "Iron Man". Variety. http://www.variety.com/VE1117936903.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-03.
  76. ^ Honeycutt, Kirk (2008-04-28). "Iron Man". The Hollywood Reporter. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/film/reviews/article_display.jsp?&rid=11021. Retrieved on 2008-05-03.
  77. ^ Lovece, Frank (2008-04-30). "'Iron Man'". Newsday. http://www.newsday.com/services/newspaper/printedition/tuesday/news/ny-etiron295667140apr29,0,641421.story. Retrieved on 2008-05-03.
  78. ^ Scott, A. O. (2008-05-02). "Iron Man (2008)". The New York Times. http://movies.nytimes.com/2008/05/02/movies/02iron.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-03.
  79. ^ Franklin, Garth (2008-05-02). "Review: "Iron Man"". Dark Horizons. http://www.darkhorizons.com/reviews/ironman.php. Retrieved on 2008-05-03.
  80. ^ Gilchrist, Todd (2008-04-29). "Iron Man Review". IGN. http://uk.movies.ign.com/articles/870/870262p1.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-29.
  81. ^ Edelstein, David (2008-04-25). "A Hero for Our Times". New York. http://nymag.com/movies/reviews/46460/. Retrieved on 2008-05-03.
  82. ^ Denby, David (2008-05-05). "Unsafe". The New Yorker. http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/cinema/2008/05/05/080505crci_cinema_denby. Retrieved on 2008-05-03.
  83. ^ Roger Ebert (2008-12-05). "The best films of 2008... and there were a lot of them". http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20081205/COMMENTARY/812059997/1023. Retrieved on 2008-12-09.
  84. ^ "Top 10 Movies". Time. 2008-12-09. http://www.time.com/time/specials/2008/top10/article/0,30583,1855948_1863826_1863827,00.html#. Retrieved on 2008-12-09.
  85. ^ a b "Iron Man (2008) - Weekend Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?page=weekend&id=ironman.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-04.
  86. ^ "Iron Man (2008) - Iron Man King Of the Box Office". GamerCenterOnline. http://www.gamercenteronline.net/?p=483. Retrieved on 2008-05-04.
  87. ^ "Biggest Openings at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/weekends/. Retrieved on 2008-05-02.
  88. ^ "Movies With the Widest Openings at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. http://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/widest.htm?page=WIDEST&p=.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-06.
  89. ^ "Opening Day Records at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. http://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/days/?page=open&p.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-03.
  90. ^ David Germain (2008-05-04). "Marvel turns 'Iron Man' into gold with $100M-plus debut". Associated Press via Forbes. http://www.forbes.com/feeds/ap/2008/05/04/ap4967190.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-04.
  91. ^ "Top Weekends:2nd-12th". Box Office Mojo. 2008-05-11. http://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/weekends/moreweekends.htm?page=2&p=.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-12.
  92. ^ "Iron Man (2008)". Box Office Mojo. http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?page=daily&id=ironman.htm. Retrieved on 2008-06-25.
  93. ^ Carl DiOrio (2008-06-19). ""Iron Man" bolts past $300 million at box office". NewsDaily. http://www.newsdaily.com/stories/n19296777-ironman/. Retrieved on 2008-06-25.
  94. ^ Susanne Ault (2008-05-05). "Iron Man to kick off fourth quarter". Video Business. http://www.videobusiness.com/article/CA6580245.html?desc=topstory. Retrieved on 2008-07-22.
  95. ^ Cal Kemp (2008-09-17). "IRON MAN Censored". Collider. http://www.collider.com/entertainment/news/article.asp/aid/9202/tcid/1. Retrieved on 2008-09-19.
  96. ^ "Iron Man DVD (Review)", Comics Worth Reading, October 5, 2008
  97. ^ [1]
  98. ^ "Iron Man DVD Sales". The Numbers. 2008-10-31. http://www.the-numbers.com/movies/2008/IRNMN-DVD.php. Retrieved on 2008-10-31.
  99. ^ "Academy Award winners and nominees". CNN. 2009-02-22. http://www.cnn.com/2009/SHOWBIZ/Movies/02/22/oscar.nominees.full.list/index.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-22.
  100. ^ "Oscars.com - 81st Academy Award winners". http://www.oscar.com/oscarnight/winners/. Retrieved on 2009-02-22.
  101. ^ "Nominations for the 35th Annual Saturn Awards". Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films. http://www.saturnawards.org/nominations.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  102. ^ [2]
  103. ^ [3]

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Iron Man
(film)  
  * Official website
  * Iron Man at the Internet Movie Database
  * Iron Man at Rotten Tomatoes
  * Iron Man at Metacritic
  * Iron Man at Box Office Mojo
  * Iron Man at Allmovie
  * Iron Man on Marvel.com

Preceded by  
Baby Mama Box office number-one films of 2008 (USA)  
May 4 - May 11 Succeeded by  
The Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian  
Preceded by  
Forgetting Sarah Marshall Box office number-one films of 2008 (UK)  
May 4 - May 18 Succeeded by  
Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull  
  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Iron Man  
Creators

Don Heck Â· Stan Lee Â· Larry Lieber Â· Jack Kirby  
Supporting characters

Bethany Cabe Â· Guardsman Â· Maria Hill Â· Rumiko Fujikawa Â· Happy Hogan Â·
Edwin Jarvis Â· Pepper Potts Â· War Machine Â· Howard Stark Â· Ho Yinsen  
Villains

Blizzard Â· Blacklash Â· Controller Â· Crimson Dynamo Â· Dreadknight Â·
Ezekiel Stane Â· Fin Fang Foom Â· Firebrand Â· Firepower Â· Ghost Â· Iron
Monger Â· Justin Hammer Â· Living Laser Â· Madame Masque Â· Mandarin Â· Melter
Â· M.O.D.O.K. Â· Spymaster Â· Sunset Bain Â· Temugin Â· Titanium Man Â·
Unicorn Â· Ultimo  
Storylines

Iron Man and Sub-Mariner Â· "Demon in a Bottle" Â· "Doomquest" Â· "Armor Wars"
Â· Ultimate Iron Man Â· "Extremis" Â· Enter the Mandarin  
Films

The Invincible Iron Man Â· Iron Man Â· Iron Man II  
TV series

The Marvel Super Heroes Â· Iron Man Â· Iron Man: Armored Adventures  
Video games

Captain America and the Avengers Â· Iron Man / X-O Manowar in Heavy Metal Â·
The Invincible Iron Man Â· Marvel: Ultimate Alliance Â· Iron Man  
Related articles

Alternate versions Â· In other media Â· Avengers Mansion Â· Iron Man's armor
Â· Roxxon Â· Stark Industries Â· Stark Tower  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Films directed by Jon Favreau  
Made (2001) Â· Elf (2003) Â· Zathura (2005) Â· Iron Man (2008) Â· Iron Man II
(2010)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Marvel Comics films  
Live action

Single  
films

Howard the Duck (1986) â¢ The Punisher (1989) â¢ Captain America (1990) â¢
The Fantastic Four (1994) â¢ Hulk (2003) â¢ The Punisher (2004) â¢ Man-
Thing (2005) â¢ Ghost Rider (2007) â¢ Iron Man (2008) â¢ The Incredible
Hulk (2008) â¢ Punisher: War Zone (2008)  
Series

Blade: Blade (1998) â¢ Blade II (2002) â¢ Blade: Trinity (2004)  
Daredevil: Daredevil (2003) â¢ Elektra (2005)  
Fantastic Four: Fantastic Four (2005) â¢ Fantastic Four: Rise of the Silver
Surfer (2007)  
Spider-Man: Spider-Man (2002) â¢ Spider-Man 2 (2004) â¢ Spider-Man 3 (2007)  
X-Men: X-Men (2000) â¢ X2 (2003) â¢ X-Men: The Last Stand (2006) â¢ X-Men
Origins: Wolverine (2009)  
Animated

Single  
films

The Invincible Iron Man (2007) â¢ Doctor Strange: The Sorcerer Supreme (2007)
â¢ Next Avengers: Heroes of Tomorrow (2008) â¢ Hulk Vs (2009)  
Series

Ultimate Avengers: Ultimate Avengers (2006) â¢ Ultimate Avengers 2 (2006)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iron_Man_(film)"

Categories: 2000s action films | Science fiction action films | 2008 films |
American films | English-language films | Films based on Marvel comics | Films
shot in Super 35 | Iron Man | Paramount films | Superhero films

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 03:00.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



