
# Michael Chabon

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Michael Chabon  
<IMG>  
Chabon at a book signing in 2006.  
Born May 24, 1963 (1963-05-24) (age 45)  
Washington, D.C.  
Pen name Leon Chaim Bach, Malachi B. Cohen, August Van Zorn  
Occupation Novelist, screenwriter, columnist, short story writer  
Nationality American  
Writing period 1987-present  
Notable work(s) The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay (2000), The Yiddish
Policemen's Union (2007)  
Notable award(s) 1999 O. Henry Award  
2001 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction  
2007 Nebula Award for Best Novel  
2008 Hugo Award for Best Novel  
2008 Sidewise Award for Alternate History  
Spouse(s) Lollie Groth, Ayelet Waldman  
Influences

    
    
    Jorge Luis Borges, John Cheever, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Gustave Flaubert, Gabriel GarcÃ­a MÃ¡rquez, Vladimir Nabokov, Robert Stone, Edith Wharton[1]  
Official website  
Michael Chabon (pron. SHAY-bon) [2] (born May 24, 1963) is an American author
and "one of the most celebrated writers of his generation," according to the
The Virginia Quarterly Review.[3] His first novel, The Mysteries of Pittsburgh
(1988), was published when Chabon was 25 and catapulted him to literary
celebrity. He followed it with a second novel, Wonder Boys (1995), and two
short-story collections. In 2000, Chabon published The Amazing Adventures of
Kavalier & Clay, a critically acclaimed novel that The New York Review of
Books called his magnum opus; it received the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction in
2001. His most recent novel, The Yiddish Policemen's Union, an alternate
history mystery novel, was published in 2007 to enthusiastic reviews and won
the Hugo, Sidewise, and Nebula awards[4]; his serialized novel Gentlemen of
the Road appeared in book form in the fall of that same year.

His work is characterized by complex language, frequent use of metaphor, and
an extensive vocabulary,[5] along with numerous recurring themes, including
nostalgia,[5] divorce, abandonment, fatherhood, and issues of Jewish
identity.[6] He often includes gay, bisexual, and Jewish characters in his
work.[6][7] Since the late 1990s, Chabon has written in an increasingly
diverse series of styles for varied outlets; he is a notable defender of the
merits of genre fiction and plot-driven fiction, and, along with novels, he
has published screenplays, children's books, comics, and newspaper serials.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
    * 1.1 Early years
    * 1.2 Initial literary success
    * 1.3 Struggles with second novel
    * 1.4 Kavalier & Clay
    * 1.5 Recent work
    * 1.6 Personal life
  * 2 Interest in genre fiction
    * 2.1 The Van Zorn persona
  * 3 The Chabon universe
  * 4 Experiences with Hollywood
  * 5 Works
    * 5.1 Novels
    * 5.2 Young Adult
    * 5.3 Short story collections
    * 5.4 Essay collections
    * 5.5 As contributor or editor
    * 5.6 Essays
    * 5.7 Appearances at Large
  * 6 Footnotes
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

### [edit] Early years

Michael Chabon (pronounced, in his words, "Shea as in Shea Stadium, Bon as in
Bon Jovi", i.e., [ËÊeÉªËbÉn]) was born in Washington, D.C., to Robert
Chabon, a physician and lawyer, and Sharon Chabon, also a lawyer. He was
raised in the family that followed Judaism. Chabon said he knew he wanted to
be a writer when, at the age of ten, he wrote his first short story for a
class assignment. Featuring Sherlock Holmes, the story received an A, and
Chabon recalled, "I thought to myself, 'That's it. That's what I want to do. I
can do this.' And I never had any second thoughts or doubts."[8] His parents
divorced when Chabon was eleven, and he grew up in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
and Columbia, Maryland. Columbia, where Chabon lived nine months of the year
with his mother, was "a progressive planned living community in which racial,
economic, and religious diversity were actively fostered."[5]

Chabon attended Carnegie Mellon University for a year before transferring to
the University of Pittsburgh, where he received a Bachelor of Arts degree in
1984.[5] He then went to graduate school at the University of California,
Irvine, where he received a Master of Fine Arts degree in creative writing.

### [edit] Initial literary success

Chabon's first novel, The Mysteries of Pittsburgh, was written as his UC-
Irvine master's thesis. Without telling Chabon, his professor, Donald Heiney
(better known by his pen name, MacDonald Harris), sent it to a literary
agent,[9] who got the author an impressive $155,000 advance on the novel (most
first-time novelists receive advances ranging from $5,000 to $7,500.)[10] The
Mysteries of Pittsburgh appeared in 1988 and became a bestseller, instantly
catapulting Chabon to the status of literary celebrity.

Chabon was ambivalent about his newfound fame. He turned down offers to appear
in a Gap ad and to be featured as one of People's "50 Most Beautiful
People."[11] (He later said, of the People offer, "I don't give a shit [about
it]....I only take pride in things I've actually done myself. To be praised
for something like that is just weird. It just felt like somebody calling and
saying, 'We want to put you in a magazine because the weather's so nice where
you live.'")[7]

In 2001, Chabon reflected on the success of his first novel by saying that
while "the upside was that I was published and I got a readership[, the]
downside....was that, emotionally, this stuff started happening and I was
still like, 'Wait a minute, is my thesis done yet?' It took me a few years to
catch up."[7] In 1991, Chabon published A Model World, a collection of short
stories, many of which had been published previously in The New Yorker.

### [edit] Struggles with second novel

After the success of The Mysteries of Pittsburgh, Chabon spent five years
working on a second novel. Called Fountain City, the novel was a "highly
ambitious opus....about an architect building a perfect baseball park in
Florida"[12] that eventually ballooned to 1,500 pages, with no end in
sight.[8] The process was frustrating for Chabon, who, in his words, "never
felt like I was conceptually on steady ground."[12]

At one point, Chabon submitted a 672-page draft to his agent and editor, who
disliked the work. Chabon had problems dropping the novel, though. "It was
really scary," he said later. "I'd already signed a contract and been paid all
this money. And then I'd gotten a divorce and half the money was already with
my ex-wife. My instincts were telling me, This book is fucked. Just drop it.
But I didn't, because I thought, What if I have to give the money back?"[13]
"I used to go down to my office and fantasize about all the books I could
write instead."

When he finally decided to abandon Fountain City, Chabon recalls staring at
his blank computer for hours, before suddenly picturing "a 'straitlaced,
troubled young man with a tendency toward melodrama' trying to end it all."[8]
He began writing, and within a couple of days, had written 50 pages of what
would become his second novel, Wonder Boys. Chabon drew on his experiences
with Fountain City for the character of Grady Tripp, a frustrated novelist who
has spent years working on an immense fourth novel. The author wrote Wonder
Boys in a dizzy seven-month streak, without telling his agent or publisher
he'd abandoned Fountain City. The book, published in 1995, was a commercial
and critical success.

### [edit] Kavalier & Clay

Among the supporters of Wonder Boys was The Washington Post critic Jonathan
Yardley; however, despite declaring Chabon "the young star of American
letters," Yardley argued that, in his works to that point, Chabon had been
preoccupied "with fictional explorations of his own....It is time for him to
move on, to break away from the first person and explore larger worlds."[14]
Chabon later said that he took Yardley's criticism to heart, explaining, "It
chimed with my own thoughts. I had bigger ambitions."[15] In 1999 he published
his second collection of short stories, Werewolves in their Youth, which
included his first published foray into genre fiction,[3] the grim horror
story "In the Black Mill."

Shortly after completing Wonder Boys, Chabon discovered a box of comic books
from his childhood; a reawakened interest in comics, coupled with memories of
the "lore" his Brooklyn-born father had told him about "the middle years of
the twentieth century in America....the radio shows, politicians, movies,
music, and athletes, and so forth, of that era," inspired him to begin work on
a new novel.[16] In 2000, he published The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier &
Clay, an epic historical novel that charts sixteen years in the lives of Sammy
Clay and Joe Kavalier, two Jewish cousins who create a wildly popular series
of comic books in the early 1940s, the years leading up to America's entrance
into World War II. The novel received "nearly unanimous praise" and became a
New York Times Best Seller,[5] eventually winning the 2001 Pulitzer Prize for
Fiction. Chabon reflected that, in writing Kavalier & Clay, "I discovered
strengths I had hoped that I possessed â the ability to pull off multiple
points of view, historical settings, the passage of years â but which had
never been tested before."[17]

### [edit] Recent work

In 2002, Chabon published Summerland, a fantasy novel written for younger
readers that received mixed reviews but sold extremely well,[18] and won the
2003 Mythopoeic Fantasy Award. Two years later, he published The Final
Solution, a novella about an investigation led by an unknown old man, whom the
reader can guess to be Sherlock Holmes, during the final years of World War
II. His Dark Horse Comics project The Amazing Adventures of the Escapist, a
quarterly anthology series that was published from 2004 to 2006, purported to
cull stories from an involved, fictitious sixty-year history of the Escapist
character created by the protagonists of The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier &
Clay. It was awarded the 2005 Eisner Award for Best Anthology and a pair of
Harvey Awards for Best Anthology and Best New Series.

In late 2006, Chabon completed work on Gentlemen of the Road, a 15-part
serialized novel that ran in The New York Times Magazine from January 28 to
May 6, 2007. The serial (which at one point had the working title "Jews with
Swords") was described by Chabon as "a swashbuckling adventure story set
around the year 1000."[19] Just before Gentlemen of the Road completed its
run, the author published his latest novel, The Yiddish Policemen's Union,
which he had worked on since February 2002. A hardboiled detective story that
imagines an alternate history in which Israel collapsed in 1948 and European
Jews settled in Alaska, the novel was released on May 1, 2007 to enthusiastic
reviews,[20] and spent six weeks on the New York Times Best Seller list.[21]

In May 2007, Chabon said that he was working on a young-adult novel with "some
fantastic content."[22] A month later, the author said he had put plans for
the young-adult book on hold,[23] and instead had signed a two-book deal with
HarperCollins, with his first book-length work of nonfiction to be published
in spring 2009; the work will "discuss being a man in all its complexity â a
son, a father, a husband."[24] Chabon's second book under the contract will be
a contemporary adult novel set in and around the San Francisco Bay Area, and
has a tentative publication date of 2011.

McSweeney's published Maps and Legends, a collection of Chabon's literary
essays, on May 1, 2008.[25]

### [edit] Personal life

In 1987, Chabon married the poet Lollie Groth. After the publication of The
Mysteries of Pittsburgh, he was mistakenly featured in a Newsweek article on
up-and-coming gay writers (Pittsburgh's protagonist has liaisons with people
of both sexes.) The New York Times later reported that "in some ways, [Chabon]
was happy" for the magazine's error, and quoted him as saying, "I feel very
lucky about all of that. It really opened up a new readership to me, and a
very loyal one."[11] In a 2002 interview, Chabon added, "[I]f Mysteries of
Pittsburgh is about anything in terms of human sexuality and identity, it's
that people can't be put into categories all that easily."[26] In a 2005
article, On "The Mysteries of Pittsburgh", he wrote for the New York Review of
Books, Chabon remarks on the autobiographical events that helped inspire his
first novel: "I had slept with one man whom I loved, and learned to love
another man so much that it would never have occurred to me to want to sleep
with him."[27]

According to Chabon, the popularity of The Mysteries of Pittsburgh had adverse
effects; he later explained, "I was married at the time to someone else who
was also a struggling writer, and the success created a gross imbalance in our
careers, which was problematic."[7] He and Groth divorced in 1991, and he
married the writer Ayelet Waldman in 1993. They currently live together in
Berkeley, California with their four children,[28] Sophie (b. 1994), Ezekiel
"Zeke" Napoleon Waldman (b. 1997), Ida-Rose (b. June 1, 2001), and Abraham
Wolf Waldman (b. March 31, 2003). Chabon has said that the "creative freeflow"
he has with Waldman inspired the relationship between Sammy Clay and Rosa Saks
towards the end of The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay,[16] and in 2007,
Entertainment Weekly declared the couple "a famous â and famously in love
â writing pair, like Nick and Nora Charles with word processors and not so
much booze."[22]

In 2000, Chabon told The New York Times that he kept a strict schedule,
writing from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. each day, Sunday through Thursday.[11] He tries
to write 1,000 words a day. Commenting on the rigidity of his routine, Chabon
said, "There have been plenty of self-destructive rebel-angel novelists over
the years, but writing is about getting your work done and getting your work
done every day. If you want to write novels, they take a long time, and
they're big, and they have a lot of words in them....[T]he best environment,
at least for me, is a very stable, structured kind of life."[7]

## [edit] Interest in genre fiction

In a 2002 essay, Chabon decried the state of modern short fiction (including
his own), saying that, with rare exceptions, it consisted solely of "the
contemporary, quotidian, plotless, moment-of-truth revelatory story."[29] In
an apparent reaction against these "plotless [stories] sparkling with
epiphanic dew," Chabon's post-2000 work has been marked by an increased
interest in genre fiction and plot. While The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier
and Clay was, like The Mysteries of Pittsburgh and Wonder Boys, an essentially
realistic, contemporary novel (whose plot happened to revolve around comic-
book superheroes), Chabon's subsequent works â such as The Final Solution,
his dabbling with comic book writing, and the "swashbuckling adventure" of
Gentlemen of the Road â have been almost exclusively devoted to mixing
aspects of genre and literary fiction. Perhaps the most notable example of
this is The Yiddish Policemen's Union which won five genre awards, including
the Hugo award and Nebula award.[9] Chabon seeks to "annihilate" not the
genres themselves, but the bias against certain genres of fiction such as
fantasy, science fiction and romance. [9]

Chabon's forays into genre fiction have met with mixed critical reaction. One
science fiction short story by Chabon, "The Martian Agent," was described by a
reviewer as "enough to send readers back into the cold but reliable arms of
The New Yorker."[30] Another critic wrote of the same story that it was
ârichly plotted, action-packed,â and that âChabon skilfully elaborates
his world and draws not just on the steampunk worlds of William Gibson, Bruce
Sterling and Michael Moorcock, but on alternate histories by brilliant SF
mavericks such as Avram Davidson and Howard Waldrop. The imperial politics are
craftily resonant and the story keeps us hanging on.â[31] While The Village
Voice called The Final Solution "an ingenious, fully imagined work, an expert
piece of literary ventriloquism, and a mash note to the beloved boys' tales of
Chabon's youth",[32] The Boston Globe wrote, "[T]he genre of the comic book is
an anemic vein for novelists to mine, lest they squander their
brilliance,"[33] and The New York Times added that the detective story, "a
genre that is by its nature so constrained, so untransgressive, seems unlikely
to appeal to the real writer."[30]

In 2005, Chabon argued against the idea that genre fiction, and entertaining
fiction, shouldn't appeal to "the real writer," saying that the common
perception is that "Entertainment....means junk. [But] maybe the reason for
the junkiness of so much of what pretends to entertain us is that we have
accepted â indeed, we have helped to articulate â such a narrow, debased
concept of entertainment....I'd like to believe that, because I read for
entertainment, and I write to entertain. Period."[34]

One of the more positive responses to Chabon's brand of "trickster literature"
appeared in Time magazine, whose Lev Grossman wrote that "This is literature
in mid-transformation....[t]he highbrow and the lowbrow, once kept chastely
separate, are now hooking up, [and] you can almost see the future of
literature coming."[35] Grossman classed Chabon with a movement of authors
similarly eager to blend literary and popular writing, including Jonathan
Lethem (with whom Chabon is friends),[3] Margaret Atwood, and Susanna Clarke.

On the other hand, in Slate in 2007, Ruth Franklin said, "Michael Chabon has
spent considerable energy trying to drag the decaying corpse of genre fiction
out of the shallow grave where writers of serious literature abandoned
it."[36]

### [edit] The Van Zorn persona

For some of his own genre work, Chabon has forged an unusual horror/fantasy
fiction persona under the name of August Van Zorn. More elaborately developed
than a pseudonym, August Van Zorn is purported to be a pen name for one Albert
Vetch (1899 â 1963).[37] In Chabon's 1995 novel Wonder Boys, narrator Grady
Tripp writes that he grew up in the same hotel as Vetch, who worked as an
English professor at the (nonexistent) Coxley College and wrote hundreds of
pulp stories that were "in the gothic mode, after the manner of
Lovecraft....but written in a dry, ironic, at times almost whimsical
idiom."[37] A horror-themed short story titled "In the Black Mill" was
published in Playboy in June 1997 and reprinted in Chabon's 1999 story
collection Werewolves in Their Youth, and was attributed to Van Zorn.[38]

Chabon has created a comprehensive bibliography for Van Zorn, along with an
equally fictional literary scholar devoted to his oeuvre named Leon Chaim
Bach.[39] Bach's now-defunct website (which existed under the auspices of
Chabon's) declared Van Zorn to be, "without question, the greatest unknown
horror writer of the twentieth century," and mentioned that Bach had once
edited a collection of short stories by Van Zorn titled The Abominations of
Plunkettsburg.[40] (The name "Leon Chaim Bach" is an anagram of "Michael
Chabon," as is "Malachi B. Cohen," the name of a fictional comics expert who
wrote occasional essays about the Escapist for the character's Dark Horse
Comic series.) In 2004, Chabon established the August Van Zorn Prize, "awarded
to the short story that most faithfully and disturbingly embodies the
tradition of the weird short story as practiced by Edgar Allan Poe and his
literary descendants, among them August Van Zorn."[3] The first recipient of
the prize was Jason Roberts, whose winning story, "7C", was then included in
McSweeney's Enchanted Chamber of Astonishing Stories, edited by Chabon.[39]

## [edit] The Chabon universe

Chabon has provided several subtle hints throughout his work that the stories
he tells take place in a shared fictional universe. One recurring character,
who is mentioned in three of Chabon's books but never actually appears, is Eli
Drinkwater, a fictional catcher for the Pittsburgh Pirates who died abruptly
after crashing his car on Mt. Nebo Road.[41] The most detailed exposition of
Drinkwater's life appears in Chabon's 1990 short story "Smoke," which is set
at Drinkwater's funeral, and refers to him as "a scholarly catcher, a
redoubtable batsman, and a kind, affectionate person."[41] Drinkwater was
again referred to (though not by name) in Chabon's 1995 novel Wonder Boys, in
which narrator Grady Tripp explains that his sportswriter friend Happy
Blackmore was hired "to ghost the autobiography of a catcher, a rising star
who played for Pittsburgh and hit the sort of home runs that linger in the
memory for years."[42] Tripp explains that Blackmore turned in an inadequate
draft, his book contract was cancelled, and the catcher died shortly
afterwards, "leaving nothing in Happy's notorious 'files' but the fragments
and scribblings of a ghost."[42] In Chabon's children's book Summerland
(2002), it is suggested that Blackmore was eventually able to find a publisher
for the biography; the character Jennifer T. mentions that she has read a book
called Eli Drinkwater: A Life in Baseball, written by Happy Blackmore.[43]
Drinkwater's name may have been selected in homage to contemporary author John
Crowley, whom Chabon is on the record as admiring. Crowley's novel Little, Big
featured a main character named Alice Drinkwater.

There are also instances in which character surnames reappear from story to
story. Cleveland Arning, a character in Chabon's 1988 debut novel, The
Mysteries of Pittsburgh, is described as having come from a wealthy
family,[44] one that might be expected to be able to endow a building. Near
the end of Wonder Boys (1995), it is mentioned that, on the unnamed college
campus at which Grady Tripp teaches, there is a building called Arning Hall
"where the English faculty kept office hours."[45] Similarly, in Chabonâs
1989 short story "A Model World," a character named Levine discovers, or
rather plagiarizes, a formula for "nephokinesis" (or cloud control) that wins
him respect and prominence in the meteorological field.[46] In The Amazing
Adventures of Kavalier & Clay (2000), a passing reference is made to the
"massive Levine School of Applied Meteorology," ostensibly a building owned by
New York University.[47]

## [edit] Experiences with Hollywood

Although Michael Chabon has described his attitude toward Hollywood as "pre-
emptive cynicism,"[10] for years the author has nevertheless engaged in
sustained, and often fruitless, efforts to bring both adapted and original
projects to the screen. In 1994, Chabon pitched a screenplay entitled The
Gentleman Host to producer Scott Rudin, a romantic comedy "about old Jewish
folks on a third-rate cruise ship out of Miami."[13] Rudin bought the project
and developed it with Chabon, but it was never filmed, partly due to the
release of the similarly-themed film Out to Sea in 1997. In the nineties,
Chabon also pitched story ideas for both the X-Men[48] and The Fantastic
Four[49] movies, but was rejected.

When Scott Rudin was adapting Wonder Boys for the screen, the author declined
an offer to write the screenplay, saying he was too busy writing The Amazing
Adventures of Kavalier and Clay.[10] (Directed by Curtis Hanson and starring
Michael Douglas, Wonder Boys was released in 2000 to critical acclaim.) Having
bought the film rights to The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay, Rudin
then asked Chabon to work on that film's screenplay. Although Chabon spent
sixteen months from 2001â2002 working on the novel's film adaptation, the
project has been mired in pre-production for years.

Chabon's work, however, remains popular in Hollywood, with Rudin purchasing
the film rights to The Yiddish Policemen's Union in 2002, five years before
the book would be published. The same year, Miramax bought the rights to
Summerland and Tales of Mystery and Imagination (a planned collection of eight
genre short stories that Chabon has not yet written), each of which was
optioned for a sum in the mid-six figures.[50] Chabon also wrote a draft for
2004's Spider-Man 2, about a third of which was used in the final film. Around
the time of the film's release, Chabon wrote that "People seem to want to know
which parts of the final film, if any, represent my contribution. I always
say, 'The ones you liked the best.' That is, of course, a non-answer. As is
this."[51] Soon after Spider-Man 2 was released, director Sam Raimi mentioned
that he hoped to hire Chabon to work on the film's sequel, "if I can get
him,"[52] though Chabon would end up not working on Spider-Man 3.

In October 2004, it was announced that Chabon was at work writing Disney's
Snow and the Seven, a live-action martial arts retelling of Snow White and the
Seven Dwarfs to be directed by master Hong Kong fight choreographer and
director Yuen Wo Ping.[53] In August 2006, Chabon said that he had been
replaced on Snow, sarcastically explaining that the producers wanted to go in
"more of a fun direction."[54]

Although Chabon is uninvolved with the project, director Rawson Marshall
Thurber shot a film adaptation of The Mysteries of Pittsburgh in fall
2006.[55] The film, which stars Sienna Miller and Peter Sarsgaard, will be
released in 2008. In February 2008, Scott Rudin reported that a film
adaptation of The Yiddish Policemen's Union was in pre-production, to be
written and directed by the Coen Brothers.[56][57]

## [edit] Works

### [edit] Novels

  * The Mysteries of Pittsburgh (1988)
  * Wonder Boys (1995)
  * The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay (2000)
  * The Final Solution (2004)
  * The Yiddish Policemen's Union (2007)
  * Gentlemen of the Road (2007)

### [edit] Young Adult

  * Summerland (2002)

### [edit] Short story collections

  * A Model World and Other Stories (1991)
  * Werewolves in Their Youth (1999)

### [edit] Essay collections

  * Maps and Legends (2008)
  * Manhood for Amateurs (forthcoming, October 2009)[58]

### [edit] As contributor or editor

  * McSweeney's Mammoth Treasury of Thrilling Tales (editor and contributor) (2003)
  * JSA All Stars #7, "The Strange Case of Mr. Terrific and Doctor Nil" (writer) (2004)
  * McSweeney's Enchanted Chamber of Astonishing Stories (editor) (2004)
  * Michael Chabon Presents: The Amazing Adventures of the Escapist (comic book series published by Dark Horse Comics) (2004 â 2005) (Numbers 1 â 8; the first six are also collected in three books, two numbers per volume)
  * The Best American Short Stories 2005 (editor, with Katrina Kenison) (2005)
  * The Escapists (6-issue comic book limited series published by Dark Horse Comics) (2006)

### [edit] Essays

  * Secret Skin - An essay in unitard theory. The New Yorker, March 10, 2008.

### [edit] Appearances at Large

Michael Chabon spoke at Lehigh University about his works and moreover his
Jewish-American heritage; the pangs of growing up. When asked by an audience
member what were his major literary influences, he referenced Garcia Marquez,
among others. (Sunday, March 22rd, 2009)

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ Chabon, Michael (July 2006). "It Changed My Life". www.michaelchabon.com. Archived from the original on 2006-07-20. http://web.archive.org/web/20060720152012/http://www.michaelchabon.com/archives/2005/03/it_changed_my_l.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-11.
  2. ^ "The Frozen Chosen," New York Times, April 29, 2007
  3. ^ a b c d Henderson, Eleanor. "From Pittsburgh to Sitka: On Michael Chabonâs The Yiddish Policemenâs Union" (book review), The Virginia Quarterly Review, Summer 2007. Retrieved on 2007-07-28.
  4. ^ "Nebula Awards Winners," Locus Online, April 26, 2008
  5. ^ a b c d e "Chabon, Michael: INTRODUCTION". Contemporary Literary Criticism. Ed. Jeffrey W. Hunter. Vol. 149. Thomson Gale, 2002. eNotes.com. 2006. Retrieved on 2007-07-27.
  6. ^ a b Leonard, John. âMeshuga Alaskaâ, The New York Review of Books, 2007-06-14. Retrieved on 2007-07-27.
  7. ^ a b c d e Binelli, Mark; Brian Duffy (2001-09-27). "The Amazing Story of the Comic-Book Nerd who won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction" (reprint). Rolling Stone. http://www.sugarbombs.com/kavalier/rollingstone.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-05.
  8. ^ a b c Cahill, Bryon. "Michael Chabon: a writer with many faces," Writing, Apr/May 2005.
  9. ^ a b c Spanberg, Erik (2004-11-30). "Able to leap over literary barriers in a single book: Chabon ranges from Kabbalah to Captain Nemo". The Christian Science Monitor. http://www.csmonitor.com/2004/1130/p17s01-bogn.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-19.
  10. ^ a b c Gottlieb, Jeff (2002-07-16). "Trip Along Write Path: Author struggles for Hollywood ending" (reprint). The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. http://www.findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qn4196/is_20020716/ai_n10807642/pg_1. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  11. ^ a b c Buzbee, Lewis (2000-09-24). "Michael Chabon: Comics Came First". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/books/00/09/24/reviews/000924.24buz.html?_r=1&oref=slogin. Retrieved on 2007-01-21.
  12. ^ a b Tobias, Scott (2000-11-22). "An Interview with Michael Chabon". The Onion. http://www.mcsweeneys.net/authorpages/chabon/chabon8.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-18.
  13. ^ a b Giles, Jeff (1995-04-10). "He's a real boy wonder" (fee required). Newsweek.
  14. ^ Yardley, Jonathan. "The Paper Chase" (reprint), The Washington Post, 1995-03-19. Retrieved on 2007-07-28.
  15. ^ Weich, Dave (2000). "Michael Chabon's Amazing Adventures". Powells.com. http://www.powells.com/authors/chabon.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-29.
  16. ^ a b Buchwald, Laura. "A Conversation with Michael Chabon", Boldtype, RandomHouse.com, 2000. Retrieved on 2007-07-28.
  17. ^ "Interview with Michael Chabon", FailBetter.com, Fall/Winter 2000. Retrieved on 2007-07-29.
  18. ^ Timberg, Scott (Los Angeles Times). "Asking what if ...", in The Register-Guard (Eugene, Oregon), May 6, 2007. Retrieved July 29, 2007.
  19. ^ Lengel, Kerry (2006-10-04). "Author mines Jewish history". The Arizona Republic. http://www.azcentral.com/arizonarepublic/arizonaliving/articles/1004chabon1004.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-18.
  20. ^ "The Yiddish Policemen's Union", Metacritic. Retrieved on 2007-05-08.
  21. ^ "Hardcover Fiction", The New York Times, 2007-07-01. Retrieved on 2007-07-15.
  22. ^ a b Kirschling, Gregory (2007-05-11). "The New Adventures of Michael Chabon". Entertainment Weekly. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20037742,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-08.
  23. ^ "More Details on Non-fiction Book". The Amazing Website of Kavalier & Clay (2007-06-05). Retrieved on 2007-07-27.
  24. ^ Chabon Signs Again with HC - 6/1/2007 - Publishers Weekly
  25. ^ Amazon.com listing. Retrieved on 2008-03-11.
  26. ^ {{cite news|url=http://www.metroweekly.com/feature/?ak=270|title=Blurring the Lines: Interview with Michael Chabon|last = Bugg |first = Sean|publisher=Metro Weekly|date=2002-03-14|accessdate = 2007-03-05}}
  27. ^ See Chabon, Michael (June 9, 2005) On "The Mysteries of Pittsburgh." New York Review of Books Vol 52, No 10; p. 43. The part of the article in question is quoted in the Tin Man blog.
  28. ^ Ybarra, Michael J. (2003-10-05). "Taking on the Law: Ayelet Waldman lashes out at drug sentencing in her new novel". Los Angeles Times. http://www.ayeletwaldman.com/10052003_LATimes.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-20.
  29. ^ Chabon, Michael. âThe Editorâs Notebook: A Confidential Chat with the Editor.â McSweeneyâs Mammoth Treasury of Thrilling Tales. Ed. Michael Chabon. New York: Vintage, 2002.
  30. ^ a b Friedell, Deborah (2004-11-14). "'The Final Solution': Bird of the Baskervilles" (book review). The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2004/11/14/books/review/14FRIEDEL.html?ex=1169269200&en=7121467ab5fe9b6d&ei=5070. Retrieved on 2007-01-18.
  31. ^ Quinn, Paul (2003-10-19). "On the trail of a genre high" (book review, reprint). The Times Literary Supplement. http://www.powells.com/review/2003_10_19. Retrieved on 2007-01-19.
  32. ^ Conn, Andrew Lewis (2004-11-09). "What Up, Holmes? Michael Chabon and the world's most famous detective" (book review). The Village Voice. http://www.villagevoice.com/books/0445,conn,58257,10.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-05.
  33. ^ Jensen, Kurt (2004-12-26). "Chabon's wartime 'Solution' is murder most bland" (book review). The Boston Globe. http://www.boston.com/ae/books/articles/2004/12/26/chabons_wartime_solution_is_murder_most_bland/?page=1. Retrieved on 2007-01-18.
  34. ^ Chabon, Michael. "Introduction." The Best American Short Stories 2005. Ed. Michael Chabon. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2005.
  35. ^ Grossman, Lev (2004-12-17). "Pop Goes the Literature". Time. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1009722,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-05.
  36. ^ Franklin, Ruth. "God's Frozen People: Michael Chabon carves out a Jewish state in Alaska." Slate May 8, 2007.
  37. ^ a b Chabon (1995). p. 3.
  38. ^ Gorra, Michael. [http://www.nytimes.com/books/99/01/31/reviews/990131.31gorrat.html "Endangered Species"], The New York Times, 1999-01-31. Retrieved on 2007-07-29.
  39. ^ a b "The August Van Zorn Prize for the Weird Short Story", McSweeney's Internet Tendency. Retrieved on 2007-07-28.
  40. ^ "About Abominations". www.michaelchabon.com. Archived from the original on 2003-02-05. http://web.archive.org/web/20030205074528/http://michaelchabon.com/vanzorn_about.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-28.
  41. ^ a b Chabon (1991). p. 91-103.
  42. ^ a b Chabon (1995). p. 296.
  43. ^ Chabon, Michael (2002). Summerland. New York: Hyperion. ISBN 0-7868-1615-5. p. 397.
  44. ^ Chabon, Michael (1988). The Mysteries of Pittsburgh. New York: William Morrow and Company. ISBN 0-688-07632-7. p. 114.
  45. ^ Chabon (1995). p. 325.
  46. ^ Chabon (1991). p. 72-73.
  47. ^ Chabon, Michael (2000). The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay. New York: Picador USA. ISBN 0-312-28299-0. p. 228.
  48. ^ Chabon, Michael (March 2005). "An Account of a Brief Bout of Mutant Madness". www.michaelchabon.com. Archived from the original on 2005-04-04. http://web.archive.org/web/20050404091728/www.michaelchabon.com/archives/2005/03/an_account_of_a.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-05.
  49. ^ Chabon, Michael (July 2005). "Maybe Not So Much with the Fantastic". www.michaelchabon.com. Archived from the original on 2006-02-06. http://web.archive.org/web/20060206233459/www.michaelchabon.com/archives/2005/07/maybe_not_so_mu.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-05.
  50. ^ Fleming, Michael. "Pollack shapes Chabon's 'Clay': Author also ready to wag 'Tales' tomes, Variety, 2002-03-26. Retrieved on 2007-11-01.
  51. ^ "Kavalier Movie Pretty Much Moribund Right Now". The Amazing Website of Kavalier & Clay. 2004-07-17. http://www.sugarbombs.com/kavalier/news2004.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-18.
  52. ^ Glover, Kelly (2004-10-10). "Raimi Spills About 'Spider 3'". Zap2It.com Movie News. http://movies.zap2it.com/movies/news/story/0,1259,---23179,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-18.
  53. ^ Kit, Borys (2004-10-29). "Disney, Chabon retelling 'Snow'". The Hollywood Reporter. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1000694195. Retrieved on 2007-01-18.
  54. ^ ""Jews with Swords" Are Coming". The Amazing Website of Kavalier & Clay. http://www.sugarbombs.com/kavalier/news2006aug.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-18.
  55. ^ Vancheri, Barbara (2006-08-11). "Film Notes: 'Mysteries of Pittsburgh' will film here next month". The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. http://www.post-gazette.com/pg/06223/712694-254.stm. Retrieved on 2006-10-06.
  56. ^ Purcell, Andrew. "Scott Rudin is on a roll", The Guardian, 2008-02-08. Retrieved on 2008-02-10.
  57. ^ Fleming, Michael. "Coens speak 'Yiddish' for Columbia: Rudin producing adaptation of Chabon's 'Union'", Variety, 2008-02-11. Retrieved on 2008-02-12.
  58. ^ Cairns, Becky (2009-03-29). "Pulitzer Prize-winning author visits WSU". Standard.net. Ogden Standard-Examiner. http://www.standard.net/live/news/168286. Retrieved on 2009-04-05.

## [edit] References

  * Chabon, Michael (1991). A Model World and Other Stories. New York: Avon. ISBN 0-380-71099-4.
  * Chabon, Michael (1995). Wonder Boys. New York: Picador USA. ISBN 0-312-14094-0.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Michael
Chabon  
  * [1] Transcript of interview with Ramona Koval , The Book Show, ABC Radio National 5 December 2007
  * Michael Chabon's Home Page (defunct as of January 2007; a preservation of the site, circa April 2006, is available via The Wayback Machine)
  * Interview with Michael Chabon from the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum
  * The Amazing Website of Kavalier & Clay, an unofficial but very thorough site recommended by Chabon.
  * "The Fourteen Skies of Michael Chabon", Great Books Guide.
  * Michael Chabon at the Internet Movie Database
  * Audio interview with Chabon reporting on the 2008 Democratic National Convention for The New York Review of Books

v â¢ d â¢ e

Spider-Man film series  
Spider-Man â¢ Spider-Man 2 â¢ Spider-Man 3 â¢ Spider-Man 4 â¢ Spider-Man 5
â¢ Venom  
Cast

Tobey Maguire (Spider-Man/Peter Parker) â¢ Kirsten Dunst (Mary Jane Watson)
â¢ James Franco (Harry Osborn/New Goblin) â¢ J. K. Simmons (J. Jonah
Jameson) â¢ Rosemary Harris (May Parker) â¢ Cliff Robertson (Ben Parker) â¢
Willem Dafoe (Norman Osborn/Green Goblin) â¢ Alfred Molina (Otto
Octavius/Doctor Octopus) â¢ Dylan Baker (Dr. Curt Connors) â¢ Daniel Gillies
(John Jameson) â¢ Topher Grace (Eddie Brock Jr./Venom) â¢ Thomas Haden
Church (Flint Marko/Sandman) â¢ Bill Nunn (Joseph "Robbie" Robertson) â¢
Elizabeth Banks (Betty Brant) â¢ Bryce Dallas Howard (Gwen Stacy) â¢ James
Cromwell (Captain George Stacy) â¢ Michael Papajohn (Dennis Carradine) â¢
Joe Manganiello (Flash Thompson)  
Crew

Sam Raimi â¢ Avi Arad â¢ Laura Ziskin â¢ Grant Curtis â¢ Alvin Sargent â¢
Ivan Raimi â¢ James Vanderbilt â¢ Danny Elfman â¢ Steve Bartek â¢
Christopher Young â¢ Bill Pope â¢ Bob Murawski â¢ David Koepp â¢ Scott
Rosenberg â¢ John Dykstra â¢ James Acheson â¢ Alfred Gough â¢ Miles Millar
â¢ Michael Chabon â¢ John Debney â¢ Grant Curtis â¢ Baxter Humby â¢ Peter
David â¢ Sony Pictures Imageworks  
Soundtrack

Spider-Man (soundtrack) â¢ Music from and Inspired by Spider-Man â¢ "Hero"
â¢ "It's What We're All About" â¢ "Hate to Say I Told You So" â¢ Spider-Man
theme song â¢ Spider-Man 2 (soundtrack) â¢ "Raindrops Keep Fallin' on My
Head" â¢ "Vindicated" â¢ "This Photograph Is Proof (I Know You Know)" â¢
"We Are" â¢ "I Am" â¢ "Meant to Live" â¢ "Web of Night" â¢ "Najane Kyun"
â¢ Spider-Man 3: The Official Soundtrack â¢ "Signal Fire" â¢ "The Twist"  
Video games

Spider-Man (2002 video game) â¢ Spider-Man 2 (video game) â¢ Spider-Man 3
(video game) â¢ Spider-Man: Friend or Foe â¢ Spider-Man (pinball)  
Sets and locations

Sony Pictures Studios â¢ Daily Bugle (Flatiron Building) â¢ The Loop (CTA)  
Related articles

Spider-Man in other media â¢ Spider-Man's powers and equipment (Spider-sense
â¢ Web-shooters) â¢ Goblin glider â¢ Pumpkin Bomb â¢ Sky Stick â¢
Symbiote â¢ Spider-Man: The New Animated Series â¢ Lego Spider-Man  
Persondata  
NAME Chabon, Michael  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES Cohen, Malachi B. (Pseudonym), Van Zorn, August (Pseudonym)  
SHORT DESCRIPTION American writer  
DATE OF BIRTH 1963-05-24  
PLACE OF BIRTH Washington, DC  
DATE OF DEATH  
PLACE OF DEATH  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Chabon"

Categories: American novelists | American short story writers | Pulitzer Prize
for Fiction winners | Jewish American writers | American science fiction
writers | LGBT Jews | Writers from California | Writers from Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania | Alternate history writers | Nebula Award winning authors | Hugo
Award winning authors | Sidewise Award winning authors | University of
California, Irvine alumni | University of Pittsburgh alumni | People from
Berkeley, California | Postmodern literature | 1963 births | Living people |
Bisexual writers | LGBT writers from the United States | Carnegie Mellon
University alumni

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 03:42.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



