
# Goldman Sachs

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. Goldman Sachs logo  
Type Public (NYSE: GS)  
Founded 1869  
Founder(s) Marcus Goldman  
Headquarters Flag of the United States New York, USA  
Area served Worldwide  
Key people Lloyd Blankfein  
(Chairman) & (CEO)  
Industry Financial Services  
Products Investment Banking  
Prime brokerage  
Asset Management  
Commercial Banking  
Revenue â¼ US $ 53.579 billion (2008)  
Operating income â¼ US $ 2.336 billion (2008)  
Net income â¼ US $ 2.322 billion (2008)  
Total assets â¼ US $ 884.547 billion (2008)  
Total equity â² US $ 64.369 billion (2008)  
Employees 30,067 (2008)  
Website GS.com  
The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., or simply Goldman Sachs (NYSE: GS), is a bank
holding company that engages in investment banking, securities services, and
investment management. Goldman Sachs was founded in 1869, and is headquartered
in the Lower Manhattan area of New York City at 85 Broad Street but has its
secondary office at 30 Hudson Street, Jersey City, New Jersey.[1] Goldman
Sachs has offices in all financial centers. The firm acts as a financial
advisor and money manager for corporations, governments, and wealthy families
around the world. Goldman offers its clients mergers & acquisitions advice,
underwriting services, asset management, and engages in proprietary trading,
and private equity deals. It is a primary dealer in the U.S. Treasury
securities market.

Goldman was the second largest donor to the Barack Obama campaign and the
fourth largest to the John McCain campaign in the 2008 presidential
election.[citation needed] Former Goldman Sachs employees such as Henry
Paulson and Robert Rubin have held high positions in the federal government,
regardless of which party was in the White House.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 1869 - 1930
    * 1.2 1930 - 1980
    * 1.3 1980 - 1999
    * 1.4 1999 - present
  * 2 Corporate affairs
    * 2.1 Investment banking
    * 2.2 Trading & Principal Investments
    * 2.3 Asset management and securities services
    * 2.4 GS Capital Partners
      * 2.4.1 Major Assets (GS Group)
    * 2.5 Predictions
    * 2.6 Corporate citizenship
      * 2.6.1 Charitable Services Group
      * 2.6.2 Goldman Sachs Foundation
  * 3 Alumni
  * 4 Criticism and controversy
  * 5 Goldman in the mortgage market
    * 5.1 Actions in the 2007- subprime mortgage crisis
    * 5.2 2008 Berkshire Hathaway Investment in Goldman Sachs
    * 5.3 Goldman Sachs' Alternative Mortgage Products
  * 6 Works about Goldman Sachs
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] History

### [edit] 1869 - 1930

Goldman Sachs was founded in 1869 by German Jewish immigrant Marcus
Goldman.[2] In 1882, Goldman's son-in-law Samuel Sachs joined the firm which
prompted the name change to Goldman Sachs. The company made a name for itself
pioneering the use of commercial paper for entrepreneurs and was invited to
join the New York Stock Exchange in 1896.

In the early 20th century, Goldman was a player in establishing the initial
public offering market. It managed one of the largest IPOs to date, that of
Sears, Roebuck and Company in 1906. It also became one of the first companies
to heavily recruit those with MBA degrees from leading business schools, a
practice that still continues today.[citation needed]

On December 4, 1928, it launched the Goldman Sachs Trading Corp., a closed-end
fund with characteristics similar to that of a Ponzi scheme. The fund failed
as a result of the Stock Market Crash of 1929, hurting the firm's reputation
for several years afterward.[3]

### [edit] 1930 - 1980

In 1930, Sidney Weinberg assumed the role of senior partner and shifted
Goldman's focus away from trading and towards investment banking. It was
Weinberg's actions that helped to restore some of Goldman's tarnished
reputation. On the back of Weinberg, Goldman was lead advisor on the Ford
Motor Company's IPO in 1956, which at the time was a major coup on Wall
Street. Under Weinberg's reign the firm also started an investment research
division and a municipal bond department. It also was at this time that the
firm became an early innovator in risk arbitrage.

Gus Levy joined the firm in the 1950s as a securities trader, which started a
trend at Goldman where there would be two powers generally vying for
supremacy, one from investment banking and one from securities trading. For
most of the 1950s and 1960's, this would be Weinberg and Levy. Levy was a
pioneer in block trading and the firm established this trend under his
guidance. Due to Weinberg's heavy influence at the firm, it formed an
investment banking division in 1956 in an attempt to spread around influence
and not focus it all on Weinberg.

In 1969, Levy took over as Senior Partner from Weinberg, and built Goldman's
trading franchise once again. It is Levy who is credited with Goldman's famous
philosophy of being "long-term greedy," which implies that as long as money is
made over the long term, trading losses in the short term are not to be
worried about. That same year, Weinberg retired from the firm.

Another financial crisis for the firm occurred in 1970, when the Penn Central
Railroad Company went bankrupt with over $80 million in commercial paper
outstanding, most of it issued by Goldman Sachs. The bankruptcy was large, and
the resulting lawsuits threatened the partnership capital and life of the
firm. It was this bankruptcy that resulted in credit ratings being created for
every issuer of commercial paper today by several credit rating services.[4]

During the 1970s, the firm also expanded in several ways. Under the direction
of Senior Partner Stanley R. Miller, it opened its first international office
in London in 1970, and created a private wealth division along with a fixed
income division in 1972. It also pioneered the "white knight" strategy in 1974
during its attempts to defend Electric Storage Battery against a hostile
takeover bid from International Nickel and Goldman's rival Morgan Stanley.[5]
This action would boost the firm's reputation as an investment advisor because
it pledged to no longer participate in hostile takeovers.

John Weinberg (the son of Sidney Weinberg), and John C. Whitehead assumed
roles of co-senior partners in 1976, once again emphasizing the co-leadership
at the firm. One of their initiatives was the establishment of the 14 business
principles[6] that are still used to this day.

### [edit] 1980 - 1999

In the 1980s, the firm made a move by acquiring J. Aron & Company, a
commodities trading firm which merged with the Fixed Income division to become
known as Fixed Income, Currencies, and Commodities. J. Aron was a player in
the coffee and gold markets, and the current CEO of Goldman, Lloyd Blankfein,
joined the firm as a result of this merger. In 1985 it underwrote the public
offering of the Real Estate Investment Trust that owned Rockefeller Center,
then the largest REIT offering in history. In accordance with the beginning of
the collapse of the Soviet Union, the firm also became involved in
facilitating the global privatization movement by advising companies that were
spinning off from their parent governments.

In 1986, the firm formed Goldman Sachs Asset Management, which manages the
majority of its mutual funds and hedge funds today. In the same year, the firm
also underwrote the IPO of Microsoft, advised General Electric on its
acquisition of RCA and joined the London and Tokyo stock exchanges. 1986 also
was the year when Goldman became the first United States bank to rank in the
top 10 of mergers and acquisitions in the United Kingdom. During the 1980s the
firm became the first bank to distribute its investment research
electronically and created the first public offering of original issue deep-
discount bond.

Robert Rubin and Stephen Friedman assumed the Co-Senior Partnership in 1990
and pledged to focus on globalization of the firm and strengthening the Merger
& Acquisition and Trading business lines. During their reign, the firm
introduced paperless trading to the New York Stock exchange and lead-managed
the first-ever global debt offering by a U.S. corporation. It also launched
the Goldman Sachs Commodity Index (GSCI) and opened a Beijing office in 1994.
It was this same year that Jon Corzine assumed leadership of the firm
following the departure of Rubin and Friedman. The firm joined David
Rockefeller and partners in a 50-50 join ownership of Rockefeller Center
during 1994, but later sold the shares to Tishman Speyer in 2000. In 1996,
Goldman was lead underwriter of the Yahoo! IPO and in 1998 it was global
coordinator of the NTT DoCoMo IPO. In 1999, Henry Paulson took over as Senior
Partner.

### [edit] 1999 - present

One of the largest events in the firm's history was its own IPO in 1999. The
decision to go public was one that the partners debated for decades. In the
end, Goldman decided to offer only a small portion of the company to the
public, with some 48% still held by the partnership pool.[7] 22% of the
company is held by non-partner employees, and 18% is held by retired Goldman
partners and two longtime investors, Sumitomo Bank Ltd. and Hawaii's
Kamehameha Activities Assn (the investing arm of Kamehameha Schools). This
leaves approximately 12% of the company as being held by the public. With the
firm's 1999 IPO, Henry Paulson became Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of
the firm.

In 1999 Goldman acquired Hull Trading Company, one of the world's premier
market-making firms, for $531 million. More recently, the firm has been busy
both in investment banking and in trading activities. It purchased Spear,
Leeds, & Kellogg, one of the largest specialist firms on the New York Stock
Exchange, for $6.3 billion in September 2000. It also advised on a debt
offering for the Government of China and the first electronic offering for the
World Bank. It merged with JBWere, the Australian investment bank and opened a
full-service broker-dealer in Brazil. It expanded its investments in companies
to include Burger King, McJunkin Corporation, and in January 2007, Alliance
Atlantis alongside CanWest Global Communications to own sole broadcast rights
to the CSI franchise. The firm is also heavily involved in energy trading,
including the oil speculation market, on both a principal and agent basis.[8]

Its sizable profits made during the 2007 Subprime mortgage financial crisis
led the New York Times to proclaim that Goldman Sachs is without peer in the
world of finance.[9] The firm's viability was later called into question as
the crisis intensified in September 2008.

In May 2006, Henry Paulson left the firm to serve as U.S. Treasury Secretary,
and Lloyd Blankfein was promoted to Chairman and Chief Executive Officer.
Former Goldman employees head the New York Stock Exchange, the World Bank, the
U.S. Treasury Department, the White House staff, and firms such as Citigroup
and Merrill Lynch.

In January 2007, Goldman Sachs acquired the Entertainment and Production
sector of Canadian film/television company Alliance Atlantis, as well as the
CSI: Crime Scene Investigation franchise. Distribution rights went to CBS.

On September 21, 2008, Goldman Sachs received Federal Reserve approval to
transition from an investment bank to a bank holding company. [10]

On September 22, 2008, the last two major investment banks in the United
States, Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs, both confirmed that they would
become traditional bank holding companies, bringing an end to the era of
investment banking on Wall Street. [11] The Federal Reserve's approval of
their bid to become banks ended the ascendancy of the securities firms, 75
years after Congress separated them from deposit-taking lenders, and capped
weeks of chaos that sent Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. into bankruptcy and led
to the rushed sale of Merrill Lynch & Co. to Bank of America Corp. [12] [13]

In March 2009 it was reported that in 2008, Goldman received billions of
dollars from its insurance arrangements with AIG, including $12.9bn from funds
provided by the United States taxpayers to bail out AIG.[14] [15]

## [edit] Corporate affairs

<IMG>

<IMG>

Goldman Sachs Tower in Jersey City

As of 2006[update], Goldman Sachs employed 23,467 people worldwide. It
reported earnings of US$9.34 billion and record earnings per share of
$19.69.[16] It was reported that the average total compensation per employee
in 2006 was US$622,000.[17] However, this number represents the arithmetic
mean of total compensation and is highly skewed upwards as several hundred of
the top earners command the majority of the Bonus Pools, leaving the median
that most employees earn well below this number.[18] In Business Week's recent
release of the Best Places to Launch a Career 2008, Goldman Sachs was ranked
#4 out of 119 total companies on the list. [6] The current Chief Executive
Officer is Lloyd C. Blankfein. The company ranks #1 in Annual Net Income when
compared with 86 peers in the Investment Services sector. Blankfein earned a
$67.9 million bonus in his first year. He chose to receive "some" cash unlike
present United States Secretary of the Treasury Henry Paulson, his predecessor
who chose to take his bonus entirely in company stock.[19]

Recently Goldman Sachs has been increasingly involved in both advising and
brokering deals to privatize major highways by selling them off to foreign
investors. In addition to advising Indiana on the Toll Road deal, Goldman
Sachs has worked with Texas governor Rick Perry's administration on
privatization projects, and according to John Schmidt, the former adviser to
the Chicago mayor's office, it was a Goldman Sachs representative who first
pitched the city on the idea of leasing out the Skyway. Goldman Sachs has
played a major role in advising states on how to structure privatization
dealsâeven while positioning itself to invest in the toll road market.
Conflicts of interest in such transactions are difficult to quantify. [20]

Goldman Sachs is divided into three businesses.[21]

#### [edit] Investment banking

Investment Banking is divided into two divisions and includes Financial
Advisory (mergers and acquisitions, investitures, corporate defense
activities, restructurings and spin-offs) and Underwriting (public offerings
and private placements of equity, equity-related and debt instruments).
Goldman Sachs is one of the leading investment banks, appearing in league
tables. In mergers and acquisitions, it gained fame historically by advising
clients on how to avoid hostile takeovers, moves generally viewed as
unfriendly to shareholders of targeted companies. Goldman Sachs, for a long
time during the 1980s, was the only major investment bank with a strict policy
against helping to initiate a hostile takeover, which increased Goldman's
reputation immensely among sitting management teams at the time. The
investment banking segment accounts for around 17 percent of Goldman Sachs'
revenues.[22]

#### [edit] Trading & Principal Investments

Trading and Principal Investments is the largest of the three segments, and is
the company's profit center.[23] The segment is divided into three divisions
and includes Fixed Income, Currency and Commodities (trading in interest rate
and credit products, mortgage-backed securities and loans, currencies and
commodities, structured and derivative products), Equities (trading in
equities, equity-related products, equity derivatives, structured products and
executing client trades in equities, options, and Futures contracts on world
markets), and Principal Investments (merchant banking investments and funds).
This segment consists of the revenues and profit gained from the Bank's
trading activities, both on behalf of its clients (known as flow trading) and
for its own account (known as proprietary trading).

Most trading done by Goldman is not speculative, but rather an attempt to
profit from bid-ask spreads in the process of acting as a market maker. Around
68 percent of Goldman's revenues and profits are derived from this area.[23]
Upon its IPO, Goldman predicted that this segment would not grow as fast as
its Investment Banking division and would be responsible for a shrinking
proportion of earnings. The opposite has been true however, resulting in Lloyd
Blankfein's appointment to President and Chief Operating Officer after John
Thain's departure to run the NYSE and John L. Thornton's departure for an
academic position in China.

#### [edit] Asset management and securities services

Asset Management and Securities Services is a rapidly growing business for
Goldman as it gains market share.[citation needed] It is separated into two
divisions, and includes Asset Management, which provides large institutions
and very wealthy individuals with investment advisory, financial planning
services (Private Wealth Management & AYCO), and the management of mutual
funds, as well as the so-called alternative investments (hedge funds, funds of
funds, infrastructure funds, real estate funds, and private equity funds). The
Securities Services division provides prime brokerage, financing services, and
securities lending to mutual funds, hedge funds, pension funds, foundations,
and High net worth individuals. This segment accounts for around 19 percent of
Goldman's earnings[citation needed].

David Blood is the former CEO of Goldman Sachs Asset Management.

In 2006, the Goldman Sachs Asset Management hedge fund was the largest in the
United States with $29.5 billion under management.[24] As of 2007[update], the
fund was valued at $32.5 billion, the second-largest fund hedge fund after
competitor JP Morgan's $33.1 billion fund.[25][26]

In August 2007, it emerged that Goldman had to spend $2 billion to rescue its
own Global Equity Opportunities hedge fund from "significant market
dislocation".[27]

### [edit] GS Capital Partners

Main article: Goldman Sachs Capital Partners

GS Capital Partners is the private equity arm of Goldman Sachs. It has
invested over $17 billion in the 20 years from 1986 to 2006. One of the most
prominent funds is the GS Capital Partners V fund, which comprises over $8.5
billion of equity.[28] On April 23, 2007, Goldman closed GS Capital Partners
VI with $20 billion in committed capital, $11 billion from qualified
institutional and high net worth clients and $9 billion from the firm and its
employees. GS Capital Partners VI is the current primary investment vehicle
for Goldman Sachs to make large, privately negotiated equity investments.[29]

#### [edit] Major Assets (GS Group)

  * The Ayco Company, L.P. (Financial Advisory)
  * Cogentrix Energy (Energy)
  * American Casino & Entertainment Properties (Casinos)
  * Coffeyville Resources LLC (Oil Refinery)
  * Myers Industries, Inc. (Plastic & Rubber)
  * USI Holdings Corporation (Insurance & Finance)
  * East Coast Power LLC (Energy)
  * Queens Moat Houses (Hotels)
  * Sequoia Credit Consolidation (Finance)
  * Shineway Group (Meat Processing)
  * Equity Inns, Inc. (Hotels)
  * KarstadtQuelle property group (Retailer)
  * Nursefinders Inc. (Healthcare)
  * Latin Force Group, LLC (Media)

### [edit] Predictions

In December 2005, four years after its report on the emerging "BRIC" economies
(Brazil, Russia, India, and China), Goldman Sachs named its "Next Eleven"[30]
list of countries, using macroeconomic stability, political maturity, openness
of trade and investment policies and quality of education as criteria:
Bangladesh, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, South Korea, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan,
the Philippines, Turkey and Vietnam.[31]

### [edit] Corporate citizenship

Goldman Sachs has received favorable press coverage for conducting business
and implementing internal policies related to reversing global climate
change.[32] According to the company web site, the Goldman Sachs Foundation
has given $94 million in grants since 1999, with the goal of promoting youth
education worldwide.[33] The company also has been on Fortune Magazine's 100
Best Companies to Work For list since the list was launched in 1998.[34]

In November 2007, Goldman Sachs established a donor-advised fund called
Goldman Sachs Gives that donates to charitable organizations around the world,
while increasing their maximum employee donation match to $20,000.[35]

In March 2008, Goldman launched the 10,000 Women initiative to train 10,000
women from predominantly developing countries in business and management.

#### [edit] Charitable Services Group

#### [edit] Goldman Sachs Foundation

## [edit] Alumni

  * Henry H. Fowler \- 58th United States Secretary of the Treasury (1965-1969)
  * Robert Rubin \- Former United States Treasury Secretary, ex-Chairman of Citigroup.
  * Henry Paulson \- Former United States Treasury Secretary.
  * Edward Lampert\- Hedge Fund Manager of ESL Investments. Brought K-Mart out of Bankruptcy in 2003.
  * Joshua Bolten \- former White House Chief of Staff
  * Erin Burnett \- CNBC Host
  * Jon Corzine \- Governor of the State of New Jersey.
  * Michael Cohrs \- Head of Global Banking at Deutsche Bank
  * Emanuel Derman \- Author of My Life as a Quant and co-developer of the Black-Derman-Toy model.
  * Jim Cramer \- founder of TheStreet.com, best selling author, and host of Mad Money on CNBC
  * Ashwin Navin \- President and co-founder of BitTorrent, Inc.
  * Abby Joseph Cohen \- Perma-bull market forecaster formerly of Drexel Burnham Lambert
  * George Herbert Walker IV \- member of the Bush family and current managing director at Neuberger Berman
  * Robert Zoellick \- United States Trade Representative (2001-2005), Deputy Secretary of State (2005-2006), World Bank President.
  * Mark Carney \- Current Governor of the Bank of Canada [36][37]
  * Michael D. Fascitelli\- President & Trustee of Vornado Realty Trust.
  * Neel Kashkari \- Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Financial Stability
  * Charlie Haas \- Wrestler, who is working for World Wrestling Entertainment.
  * Malcolm Turnbull \- Australian politician, currently the federal leader of the Liberal Party of Australia.
  * John Thain \- former Chairman and CEO, Merrill Lynch, and former chairman of the NYSE.
  * Robert Steel \- Chairman and President, Wachovia.
  * Reuben Jeffery III, Under Secretary of State for Economic, Business, and Agricultural Affairs (2007-)

## [edit] Criticism and controversy

In 1986, David Brown was convicted of passing inside information to Ivan
Boesky on a takeover deal.[38] Robert Freeman, who was a senior Partner, the
Head of Risk Arbitrage, and a protÃ©gÃ© of Robert Rubin, was also convicted of
insider trading, with his own account and with the firms.[39]

On November 11, 2008, the Los Angeles Times reported that Goldman Sachs, which
earned $25 M from underwriting California bonds, had advised other clients to
"short" those bonds. Shorting is essentially betting that the state will
default on the bonds, which serves to drive up the cost of the issue to the
state.

GS is the largest recipient of taxpayer money channeled through AIG
counterpart contracts (USD 12.9B). [40] This is chiefly responsible for 2008
and 1Q 2009 GS profits. This is a major controversy since officials with close
ties to GS crafted the AIG bailouts of 2008-2009.

The GS' exposure to credit derivative contacts was leveraged as high as 1000:1
as reported by the Comptroller of the Currency Administrator of National Banks
in December 2008. [41]

## [edit] Goldman in the mortgage market

### [edit] Actions in the 2007- subprime mortgage crisis

Despite the 2007 subprime mortgage crisis, Goldman was able to profit from the
collapse in subprime mortgage bonds in the summer of 2007 by selling subprime
mortgage-backed securities short. Two Goldman traders, Michael Swenson and
Josh Birnbaum, are credited with bearing responsibility for the firm's large
profits during America's sub-prime mortgage crisis.[42] The pair, who are part
of Goldman's structured products group in New York, made a profit of $4bn by
"betting" on a collapse in the sub-prime market, and shorting mortgage-related
securities. By summer of 2007, they persuaded colleagues to see their point of
view and talked around skeptical risk management executives [43]. The firm
initially avoided large subprime writedowns, and achieved a net profit due to
significant losses on non-prime securitized loans being offset by gains on
short mortgage positions.

Goldman Sachs' newest acquisitions are to include the subprime portfolio of
imploded mortgage company Popular Financial Holdings late in the third quarter
of 2008. [44]

Detractors believe that Goldman wasn't quite as careful with its clients'
money as it was with its ownâits flagship Global Alpha hedge fund tumbled
37% in the global credit crunch.[43] As most individual investments of hedge
funds are not made public, however, no one can know exactly what assets the
firm traded during the period leading up to the credit crisis.

### [edit] 2008 Berkshire Hathaway Investment in Goldman Sachs

Goldman Sachs got help from Berkshire Hathaway, which bought $5 billion in
Goldman's preferred stock, and got also warrants to buy another $5 billion in
Goldman's common stock. [7] Goldman also received $10 billion of capital from
the U.S. government in October 2008, under the Troubled Asset Relief Program

### [edit] Goldman Sachs' Alternative Mortgage Products

<IMG>

This section may stray from the topic of the article.  
Please help improve this section or discuss this issue on the talk page.  
<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2009)  
In 2006, Goldmans Sachs' mortgage-bonds division, Alternative Mortgage
Products (known as GSAMP for short), issued 83 home-loan-backed bonds, valued
at $44.5 billion.[citation needed] In the subprime sector, it grew its
business by 59% from 2005, offloading some $12.9 billion on to fund
managers.[citation needed]

According to Inside Mortgage Finance, that made GSAMP the 15th biggest issuer
of subprime-backed bonds in 2006. According to the website ABAlert.com (Asset-
backed Alert), Goldman Sachs was one of the top 10 sellers of Collateralized
Mortgage Obligations (CMO's) and may have sold about $100 billion in CMO's
over the last two and a half years. [45]

But, by the start of the third quarter this year, those securities were being
downgraded by the credit ratings agencies faster than any other subprime
lender. According to a Reuters report, Citigroup's research (June 22, 2007),
stated "portions of Goldman's GSAMP-issued bonds, which include subprime loans
from a variety of lenders, have been downgraded a combined 69 times by
Standard & Poor's and Moody's Investors Service in the year through June 15.
Sixty of the GSAMP downgrades refer to classes from 2006 bonds," Citigroup
added, and Allan Sloane in The Washington Post stated that one of Goldman's
2006 crop - the GSAMP Trust 2006- S3 - may actually be "the worst
dealâ¦floated by a top-tier firm." One in every six of the 8,274 mortgages
bundled together in GSAMP Trust 2006-S3 was already in default 18 months
later. Whoever bought the S3 bonds will have either taken a 100% loss, or are
waiting to sell it off at a heavy discount. [46]

## [edit] Works about Goldman Sachs

  * Vault (2006). Vault employer profile. Goldman Sachs. New York: Vault, Inc.. ISBN 1-581-31469-8.
  * WetFeet (2004). The Goldman Sachs Group. San Francisco, CA: WetFeet. ISBN 1-582-07450-X.
  * Ellis, Charles D. (2008). The Partnership: The Making of Goldman Sachs. New York: The Penguin Press HC. ISBN 1-594-20189-7.
  * Endlich, Lisa (1999). Goldman Sachs: The Culture Of Success. New York: A.A. Knopf. ISBN 0-679-45080-7.
  * Lindskoog, Nils (1998). Long-term Greedy: The Triumph of Goldman Sachs. Appleton, WI: McCrossen Pub.. ISBN 0-965-21533-4.

## [edit] See also

  * Goldman Sachs Capital Partners
  * Goldman Sachs Tower
  * Goldman Sachs Commodity Index

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Goldman Sachsâ Google Maps". http://maps.google.com/maps?f=q&hl=en&sll=40.704066,-74.006395&sspn=0.187914,0.31929&q=goldman+sachs&om=1&ll=40.704581,-74.01125&spn=0.011745,0.019956. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  2. ^ Spiro, Leah Nathans; Stanley Reed (1997-12-22). "INSIDE THE MONEY MACHINEâIn a big-is-all business, Goldman vows to go it alone". BusinessWeek (The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.). http://www.businessweek.com/1997/51/b3558118.htm. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  3. ^ Fox, Justin (2005-05-16). "GOLDMAN: WE RUN WALL STREET". Fortune magazine (Cable News Network LP, LLLP. A Time Warner Company). http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/2005/05/16/8260146/index.htm. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  4. ^ Hahn, Thomas K.. "Commercial Paper". in Timothy Q. Cook and Robert K. Laroche editors (PDF). Instruments of the Money Market (Seventh Edition ed.). Richmond, Virginia: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. http://www.richmondfed.org/publications/economic_research/instruments_of_the_money_market/ch09.cfm. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  5. ^ Rosenkrantz, Holly; Newton-Small, Jay (2004-11-23). "Bush Economic Adviser Friedman to Resign, Aide Says". Bloomberg.com. http://quote.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=10000103&sid=a5PUdvzX0pXc&refer=news_index. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  6. ^ "Business Principles". The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. http://www2.goldmansachs.com/our-firm/about-us/business-principles.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-24.
  7. ^ Spiro, Leah Nathans (1999-05-17). "Goldman Sachs: How Public Is This IPO?". BusinessWeek Online (The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.). http://www.businessweek.com/1999/99_20/b3629102.htm. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  8. ^ "Perhaps 60% of today's oil price is pure speculation". Global Research. http://www.globalresearch.ca/index.php?context=va&aid=8878. Retrieved on 2008-06-09.
  9. ^ "Goldman Sachs marches on with Bush's candidate for World Bank". The Independent. http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/goldman-sachs-marches-on-with-bushs-candidate-for-world-bank-451094.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-15.
  10. ^ "Goldman Sachs to be regulated by Fed". Bloomberg. http://www.reuters.com/article/mergersNews/idUSNWEN838420080922. Retrieved on 2008-09-21.
  11. ^ Wall Street in crisis: Last banks standing give up investment bank status, The Guardian, September 22, 2008
  12. ^ Goldman, Morgan Stanley Bring Down Curtain on an Era, bloomberg, September 22, 2008
  13. ^ Duke, Simon Goldman Sachs ready to hand out Â£7bn salary and bonus package... after its Â£6bn bail-out Mail on line.
  14. ^ AIG ships billions in bailout abroad, The Politico, March 15, 2009
  15. ^ A.I.G. Lists Firms It Paid With Taxpayer Money, The New York Times, March 15, 2009
  16. ^ "GOLDMAN SACHS REPORTS RECORD EARNINGS PER COMMON SHARE OF $19.69 FOR 2006" (PDF). The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.. 2006-12-12. p. 1. http://www2.goldmansachs.com/our_firm/investor_relations/financial_reports/docs/earnings/4Q06_ER-FINAL-External.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  17. ^ Gavin, Robert (2006-12-12). "Good deal: Average Goldman Sachs employee makes $622,000". The Boston Globe (The New York Times Company). http://www.boston.com/business/articles/2006/12/12/good_deal_average_goldman_sachs_employee_makes_622000/?p1=MEWell_Pos2. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  18. ^ "Please, Sir, I want Some More". New York Magazine. 2005-12-05. http://nymag.com/nymetro/news/bizfinance/biz/features/15197/. Retrieved on 2007-08-24.
  19. ^ Harper, Christine (2007-12-21). "Goldman Awards Blankfein a Record $67.9 Million Bonus (Update1)". Bloomberg.com. http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601087&sid=ac1OzKh7snD4. Retrieved on 2007-12-21.
  20. ^ Schulman, Daniel (2007-01-01). "The Highwaymen". Mother Jones. http://www.motherjones.com/news/feature/2007/01/highwaymen.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-30.
  21. ^ http://www2.goldmansachs.com/our-firm/about-us/index.html
  22. ^ Based on SEC filings for the last twelve months ending May 31, 2008.
  23. ^ a b Goldman Had More Trading-Loss Days Than Morgan Stanley, Lehman (Bloomberg.com)
  24. ^ Pasha, Shaheen (2006-10-06). "Banks' love affair with hedge funds". CNNMoney.com. http://money.cnn.com/2006/10/05/news/companies/banks_hedgefunds/index.htm?postversion=2006100607. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  25. ^ "The List: The World's Largest Hedge Funds". Foreign Policy. September,2007. http://www.foreignpolicy.com/story/cms.php?story_id=3967. Retrieved on 2008-01-18.
  26. ^ Mackintosh, James (2007-05-24). "Biggest hedge funds tighten grip". Financial Times. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/a1937de0-0994-11dc-a349-000b5df10621.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-18.
  27. ^ Goldman pumps in $2bn to bail out hedge fund (Times Online)
  28. ^ >"GS Capital Partners". The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. http://www2.goldmansachs.com/client_services/merchant_banking/pia/capital/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-08.
  29. ^ >"GS Capital Partners VI". Business Wire. http://home.businesswire.com/portal/site/google/index.jsp?ndmViewId=news_view&newsId=20070423005856&newsLang=en.
  30. ^ Goldman Sachs Paper No.134 Relevant Emerging Markets
  31. ^ Khan, Jasim Uddin (2005-12-15). "Bangladesh on Goldman Sachs 'Next Eleven' list". The Daily Star. http://www.thedailystar.net/2005/12/15/d5121501107.htm. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  32. ^ "The Street Turns Green". Newsweek (Newsweek, Inc.). 2007. http://www.newsweek.com/id/36497. Retrieved on 2007-11-23.
  33. ^ "The Goldman Sachs Foundation". The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. http://www2.goldmansachs.com/our_firm/our_culture/corporate_citizenship/gs_foundation/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-18.
  34. ^ "100 Best Companies to Work 2007, All Stars". Fortune. 2007. http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/bestcompanies/2007/allstars/. Retrieved on 2007-05-18.
  35. ^ Goldman Sachs Establishes Goldman Sachs Gives Charitable Fund
  36. ^ Bank of Canada Press Release
  37. ^ The opaque and unaccountable Mr. Hide
  38. ^ Worthy, Ford S.; Brett Duval Fromson and Lorraine Carson (1986-12-22). "WALL STREET'S SPREADING SCANDAL". Fortune Magazine (Cable News Network LP, LLLP. A Time Warner Company). http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/1986/12/22/68462/index.htm. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  39. ^ Thomas, Landon Jr. (2002-02-18). "Cold Call". New York Magazine (New York Magazine Holdings LLC). http://nymag.com/nymetro/news/bizfinance/columns/businessclass/5693/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  40. ^ http://www.businessweek.com/the_thread/economicsunbound/archives/2009/03/german_and_fren.html#more
  41. ^ http://www.occ.gov/ftp/release/2009-34a.pdf
  42. ^ Time Online, December 19, 2007, [1]
  43. ^ a b The Guardian, December 21, 2007, [2]
  44. ^ Market Watch,Popular Announces Substantial Sale of Loan and Servicing Assets of its U.S. Mortgage Unit Popular Financial Holdings to Goldman Sachs,[3]
  45. ^ Finfacts Ireland, 'How Goldman Sachs made money from US subprime mortgages on the way up and down', December 4, 2007 [4]
  46. ^ The Washington Post, An Unsavory Slice of Subprime, October 16, 2007 [5].

## [edit] External links

  * Goldman Sachs

<IMG> Companies portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Major investment banks  
ABN Amro Â· Banc of America Securities Â· Bank of Montreal Â· Barclays Capital
Â· The Blackstone Group Â· BNP Paribas Â· CIBC World Markets Â· Citigroup Â·
CLSA Â· Credit Suisse Â· Deutsche Bank Â· Dresdner Kleinwort Â· Goldman Sachs
Â· Houlihan Lokey Â· HSBC Â· JPMorgan Chase Â· ING Group Â· KBC Bank Â· Keefe,
Bruyette & Woods Â· Lazard Â· Macquarie Group Â· Merrill Lynch Â· Mizuho
Corporate Bank Â· Morgan Stanley Â· N M Rothschild & Sons Â· Nomura Securities
Â· Oppenheimer & Co. Â· Piper Jaffray Â· Royal Bank of Scotland Â· RBC Capital
Markets Â· SociÃ©tÃ© GÃ©nÃ©rale Â· Stifel Nicolaus Â· UOB-Kay Hian Â· UBS Â·
Wachovia  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goldman_Sachs"

Categories: Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange | Wikipedia
articles with off-topic sections | Goldman Sachs | Banks based in New York
City | Companies established in 1869 | Family businesses | Investment banks |
Rockefeller Center | YES Network | Entities involved in United States housing
bubble | Primary dealers

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements
since June 2008 | Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006 |
All articles containing potentially dated statements | Articles containing
potentially dated statements from 2007 | Articles needing additional
references from February 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since
February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 12:37.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



