
# Last.fm

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Semi-protected

Last.fm Last.fm logo  
Last.fm main page  
URL www.last.fm  
Commercial? Yes  
Type of site Music, Statistics & Community  
Registration Free with optional subscription  
Available language(s) Multilingual (12)  
Owner CBS Interactive  
Created by Communal  
Current status Active  
Last.fm is a UK-based Internet radio and music community website, founded in
2002. It claims over 30 million active users based in more than 200
countries[1]On 30 May 2007, CBS Interactive acquired Last.fm for Â£140m ($280m
USD).[2]

Using a music recommender system called "Audioscrobbler", Last.fm builds a
detailed profile of each user's musical taste by recording details of all the
songs the user listens to, either on the streamed radio stations, the user's
computer or some portable music devices. This information is transferred to
Last.fm's database ("scrobbled") via a plugin installed into the user's music
player. The profile data is then displayed on the user's profile page. The
site offers numerous social networking features and can recommend and play
artists similar to the user's favourites.

Users can create custom radio stations and playlists from any of the audio
tracks in Last.fm's music library, and are able to listen to some individual
tracks on demand, or download tracks if the rights holder has previously
authorised it.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Funding and staff
  * 3 Features
    * 3.1 User accounts
    * 3.2 Subscriber accounts
  * 4 Artist pages
  * 5 Music catalogue
    * 5.1 Independent artists and record labels
    * 5.2 Previews and free downloads
  * 6 Tags
  * 7 Charts
    * 7.1 Global charts
  * 8 Last.fm radio
    * 8.1 Last.fm player
  * 9 Audioscrobbler plugin
    * 9.1 List of supported media players
    * 9.2 Supported audio players (hardware)
  * 10 Other third party applications
    * 10.1 Last.fm supported applications
    * 10.2 Other applications
  * 11 Similar services
  * 12 See also
  * 13 References
  * 14 Further reading
  * 15 External links

  
## History

<IMG>

This section may contain an inappropriate mixture of prose and timeline.
Please help convert this timeline into prose or, if necessary, a list.
(September 2008)  
The current Last.fm website was developed from two separate sources:
Audioscrobbler and Last.fm, which were merged in 2005.

Audioscrobbler began as a computer science project by Richard Jones while he
attended the University of Southampton School of Electronics and Computer
Science in the United Kingdom.[3] Jones developed the first plugins, and then
opened an API to the community, after which many music players on different
operating system platforms were supported. Audioscrobbler was limited to
recording music its users played on a registered computer, which allowed for
charting and collaborative filtering.

Last.fm was founded in 2002 by Felix Miller, Martin Stiksel, Saulyus
Chyamolonskas, Michael Breidenbruecker and Thomas Willomitzer, as an internet
radio station and music community site, using similar music profiles to
generate dynamic playlists. The site name takes advantage of a domain hack
using the top level domain of Micronesia, popular with FM radio related sites.
The "love" and "ban" buttons allowed users to gradually customise their
profiles. Last.fm won the Europrix 2002 and was nominated for the Prix Ars
Electronica in 2003.[4]

The Audioscrobbler and Last.fm teams began to work closely together, both
teams moving into the same offices in Whitechapel, London, and by 2003 Last.fm
was fully integrated with Audioscrobbler profiles. Input could come through an
Audioscrobbler plugin or a Last.fm station. The sites also shared many
community forums, although a few were unique to each site.

The old Audioscrobbler site at the audioscrobbler.com domain name was wholly
merged into the new Last.fm site in 9 August 2005. This launched
audioscrobbler.net as a separate development-oriented site on 5 September
2005. However, at the very bottom of each of the Last.fm pages there was an
Audioscrobbler "slogan", which changes each time the page is refreshed. Based
on well known sayings or advertisements, these originally appeared at the top
of the old Audioscrobbler website pages and were all created and contributed
by the original site members.[citation needed]

An update to the site was made on 14 July 2006 which included a new software
application for playing Last.fm radio streams and for logging of tracks played
with other media players. Other changes included the improvement of the
friends system and updating it to require a two-way friendship, the addition
of the Last.fm "Dashboard" where users can see on one page relevant
information for their profile, expanded options for purchasing music from
online retailers and a new visual design for the web site (including an
optional black colour scheme).[citation needed]

The site began expanding its language base on 15 July 2006,[citation needed]
when a Japanese version of the site was launched. Currently, the site is
available in various other languages, including German, Spanish, French,
Italian, Polish, Portuguese, Swedish, Russian, Turkish and Simplified Chinese.

In late 2006, the site won Best Community Music Site at the BT Digital Music
Awards in October[5]. Last.fm, also, teamed up with EMI on Tuneglue-
Audiomap.[6] Furthermore in January 2007 it was nominated for Best Website in
the NME Awards.

At the end of April 2007, rumours of negotiations between Viacom and Last.fm
emerged, suggesting that Viacom intended to purchase Last.fm for about Â£225
million.[7]

In May 2007 it was announced that Channel 4 Radio was to broadcast a weekly
show called Worldwide Chart that reflects what Last.fm users around the world
are listening to. There are also plans to add a video section, enabling users
to create their own personalised video channels.

On 30 May 2007 it was announced that Last.fm has been bought by CBS for Â£140
million with Last.fm's current management team staying in place.[8]

In July 2008, the "new generation" Last.fm was launched featuring a completely
new layout, colour-scheme and several new features as well as some old ones
removed.[9] This was, however, met with dissatisfaction amongst some users,
who complained about, among other things, the "ugly and non-user-friendly
layout," numerous bugs and slowness of the site.[10][11][12] The new design
has also removed most mentions of Audioscrobbler. A month after the redesign
was launched a press release was issued by CBS crediting the redesign with
generating 20% growth in the site's traffic,[13] however industry observers
pointed out that this still leaves last.fm in a distant second place behind
imeem.com.[14]

## Funding and staff

Last.fm Ltd is funded from the sale of online advertising space, monthly user
subscriptions and donations. In 2004 the company received the first round of
angel money, from Peter Gardner, an investment banker who was introduced to
the founders as early as 2002. A second round was led by Stefan Glaenzer
(joined by Joi Ito and Reid Hoffman), who bought into Michael Breidenbrueckers
shares as well. In 2006 the company received the first round of venture
capital funding from European investors Index Ventures, whose General Partners
Neil Rimer and Danny Rimer also joined Last.fm's board of directors,
consisting of Felix Miller, Martin Stiksel and Stefan Glaenzer (Chair).[15].
On Tuesday, 24 March 2009 it was announced on the official Last.fm blog that
Last.fm will charge users â except for those in the United States, United
Kingdom, or Germany â a subscription fee of â¬3.00 per month for use of
Last.fm radio.[16]

## Features

### User accounts

The free user account includes access to all the main features listed below.
Registered Users are also able to post in the Last.fm forums, send and receive
private messages and use the Last.fm client music player.

  * Profile: A Last.fm User can build up a musical profile using any or all of several methods: by listening to their personal music collection on a music player application on a computer or an iPod with an Audioscrobbler plugin, or by listening to the Last.fm internet radio service, either with the Last.fm client, or with the embedded flash player. All songs played are added to a log from which personal top artist/track bar charts and musical recommendations are calculated. They call this automatic track logging scrobbling.

    Last.fm automatically generates a profile page for every user which includes basic information such as their user name, avatar, date of registration and total number of tracks played. This can be customised with additional information or photographs if desired but the fundamental layout cannot be changed. There is also a Shoutbox for public messages. Profile pages are visible to all, together with a list of top artists and tracks, and the 10 most recently played tracks. Each user's profile has a 'Taste-o-Meter' which gives a rating of how compatible your music taste is.
    Profile pages can also include lists of friends, weekly musical "neighbours", favourite tags, groups and events. An optional customisable playlist may be also added, with tracks that the user wishes to share or promote. Other features include the ability to remove songs listened to within a 2 week time-frame, navigation to linked profiles (such as friends and musical neighbours) and a list of individual users' favourite albums.
    A customisable display of Recently Played tracks, is now available via web services, allowing users to add them to blogs, MySpace or as forum signatures.
  * Recommendations: The most recent expanded service on Last.fm is a revamped personal recommendations page known as "The Dashboard". This is only visible to the user concerned and lists suggested new music, events, journal entries and other people with similar tastes, all tailored to the user's own preferences.

    Recommendations are calculated using a collaborative filtering algorithm so users can browse and hear previews of a list of artists not listed on their own profile but which appear on those of others with similar musical tastes. The page also lists music that has been directly recommended to the user and groups the user belongs to, journals written by users about artists the user listens to, and other users who have listened to similar music recently. There is also a 'recommendation radio' station which will play music specifically filtered based on the user's last week of listening. Last.fm also permits users to manually recommend specific artists, songs or albums to other users on their friends list or groups they belong to, providing the recommendation in question is included in the Last.fm database.
  * Groups: Last.fm allows the formation of user groups between users with something in common (for example, fans of an artist, a genre of music, or membership of another internet forum). Groups may be linked to artists and countries. Any user may start a group and add members. Most groups are open to all, but membership may be subject to approval by the Group Leader. Last.fm will generate a group profile similar to the users' profiles, showing an amalgamated set of data and charting the group's overall tastes. Individual groups have their own discussion forums and journal space, and a group radio station based on members' music profiles is automatically generated once a sufficient number of members have joined. Group members are also able to submit recommendations of artists or tracks to all the other members of their group.

  * Events : With the October 2006 update, 'events'-functionality was added, which lets users specify a location and a radius from the location, then suggests gigs or festivals that that user may want to see in the area. Users can set themselves as attending an event.

    Any registered user may add a new venue or event which will then be listed on the band or artist's main page, together with other details if available. There is also a facility to submit reviews and photographs of past events.
### Subscriber accounts

Last.fm offers paid accounts, costing Â£1.50, â¬2.50, $3 or Â¥350 per
month.[17] Some of the extra features that paid users receive are:[17]

  * More radio options (custom user playlists and loved tracks radio)
  * The ability to view recent visitors to one's own profile page
  * Priority on Last.fm server
  * The ability to play Last.fm radio outside of the UK, US or Germany

## Artist pages

Once an artist has had a track or tracks "scrobbled" by at least one user,
Last.fm automatically generates a main artist page, even if there is no music
available for streaming on the radio. This page shows details of the total
number of plays, the total number of listeners, the most popular weekly and
overall tracks, the top weekly listeners, linked groups and journals, a list
of similar artists, most popular tags and a shoutbox for messages. There are
also links to events, additional album and individual track pages and similar
artists radio. If the artist has music available for streaming or download an
embedded flash player is also included with samples of the most popular
tracks.

Official music videos and other videos imported from YouTube may also be
viewed on the relevant artist and track pages.

Users may add relevant biographical details and other information to any
artist's main page in the form of a Wiki. Edits are regularly moderated to
prevent vandalism. A photograph of the artist may also be added. If more than
one is submitted, the most popular is chosen by public vote. User submitted
content is licensed for use under the GNU Free Documentation License.

Last.fm currently cannot disambiguate artists with the same name; a single
artist profile is shared between valid artists with the same name.[18]

## Music catalogue

Last.fm's music library contains well over 3.5 million individual audio tracks
from artists on all the major commercial labels. Users are not allowed to
upload copyrighted audio files but commercially available albums are regularly
added by Last.fm staff. Most currently popular and other well known artists
have tracks available for streaming, although there are significant gaps in
coverage and the most recent releases are not always added immediately. The
music catalogue includes a wide variety of genres including classical, opera
and musicals, as well as many little known and specialist recordings which are
no longer generally available.

In February 2007 Warner Music, the world's third-largest music company,
announced that it had signed a deal to allow its entire catalogue to be played
on Last.fm.[19] Warner's music would be made available over Last.fm's service
in Europe and North America. The site's co-founder, Martin Stiksel, said they
were also in talks with the other three major labels and content holders.
However in June 2008 Warner cancelled its deal with last.fm and removed all
Warner artists from the site's on demand streaming catalogue,[20] Warner have
indicated that they are in disagreement over the financial compensation
offered by last.fm.

On 9 July 2007, it was announced that Last.fm had also signed a deal with the
Sony BMG record label. The partnership will give the service's users access to
the entire Sony BMG catalogue of music.

### Independent artists and record labels

Independent record labels and unsigned artists are encouraged to promote their
music on Last.fm, because the filtering and recommendation features mean that
the music will be played for users who already like similar artists. Labels
and artists can upload their own music for streaming and Last.fm provides
access to weekly airplay statistics, with facilities for promoting individual
artists or tracks. Labels and artists may choose whether their music is to be
made available for streaming only, or for purchase or free download.

### Previews and free downloads

30-second previews of any of the stream-able tracks are available on demand,
from anywhere in the site, by clicking on the grey arrow next to the name of
the track or artist. Some tracks are also available to preview in full if the
label or artist has specifically authorized it; these are indicated by black
arrows. (All tracks are played in full when users listen to appropriate
stations).

In October 2006, Last.fm brought back its free download service which allowed
users to download select tracks as specified by the artist or the label. The
service only includes tracks on "indie" labels or by bands who upload their
own material, although some artists who have since moved onto a major label
(such as Coheed and Cambria and My Chemical Romance) have kept their free
songs available for download. More than 100,000 songs are currently
downloadable,[21] and there is a separate free download chart, updated weekly,
showing the 200 most popular tracks.

On 23 January 2008, Last.fm changed its business model with the Free the Music
initiative. Most tracks and albums can be streamed from the website free of
charge up to three times. The artists are paid each time the track is
played.[22] This service is still in beta mode and free on demand listening is
currently only available to users in the US, UK and Germany.

## Tags

With the August 2005 relaunch, Last.fm supports user-end tagging or labelling
of artists, albums, and tracks to create a site-wide folksonomy of music.
Users can browse via tags, but the most important benefit is tag radio,
permitting users to play music that has been tagged a certain way. This
tagging can be by genre ("garage rock"), mood ("chill"), artist characteristic
("baritone"), or any other form of user-defined classification ("seen live").
However, since tagging is not moderated, it is prone to manipulation by the
site's users, most often resulting in genre disagreements among users or
pushing certain artists higher up on certain tag charts.

Subscribers are also able to create personal tag radio stations containing
only tracks and artists that they have tagged themselves. All tag radio
stations (including subscriber's personal tag stations) can be played by
anybody, including non-subscribers.

## Charts

One particular feature of Last.fm is the automatic weekly generation and
archiving of detailed personal music charts and statistics which are created
as part of its profile building. Users have several different charts
available, including Top Artists, Top Tracks, and Top Albums, as well as
Weekly Top Artists and Weekly Top Tracks. Each of these charts is based on the
actual number of people listening to the track, album or artist recorded
either through an Audioscrobbler plugin or the Last.fm radio stream.

Additionally, charts are available for the top tracks by each artist in the
Last.fm system as well as the top tracks for individual albums (when the
tagging information of the audio file is available). Artist profiles also keep
track of a short list of Top Fans, which is calculated by a formula meant to
portray the importance of an artist in a fan's own profile, balancing out
users who play hundreds of tracks overall versus those who play only a few.

As the information generated is largely compiled from the ID3 data from audio
files "scrobbled" from user's own computers, and which may be incorrect or
misspelled, there are many errors in the listings. Tracks with ambiguous
punctuation are especially prone to separate listings, which can dilute the
apparent popularity of a track. Artists or bands with the same name are not
always differentiated. The system does attempt to translate some different
artist tags to a single artist profile, but does not attempt to harmonise
track names.

Charts are also available for user groups, thus providing a view into a
demographic slice, and can reveal interesting new music based on the
preferences of similar users.

The Last.fm artist charts currently do not take track length into
consideration. For example, an album with 22 short tracks will boost that
artist's popularity for a particular user's rankings much more than an album
with only five long tracks, even though the user spent the same amount of time
listening to each. The impact of this problem is limited to personal charts.
All other charts are calculated using reach, that is, the number of users who
play a certain artist or track, rather than the total number of plays. This is
also a defence against users who in the early days of Audioscrobbler submitted
spam data in order to boost the rankings of a particular artist or song or
their own ranking as a fan.

### Global charts

<IMG>

<IMG>

Global Track Chart showing the top 10 tracks for the week ending 3 September
2006

Last.fm generates weekly "global" charts of the top 400 artists and tracks
listened to by all Last.fm users. To prevent the artificial boosting of an
artist or song by deliberately repeated tracks from a single listener, these
charts are based on the total number of individual listeners (the reach) and
not the number of actual plays.

The result is notably different from traditional commercial music charts
provided by the UK Top 40, Billboard magazine, Soundscan and others, which are
based on radio plays or sales. Last.fm charts are less volatile and a new
album's release may be reflected in play data for many months or years after
it drops out of commercial charts. For example, The Beatles have consistently
been a top 5 band at Last.fm, reflecting the continued popularity of the
band's music irrespective of current album sales.

The Global Tag Chart shows the 100 most popular tags that have been used to
describe artists, albums, and tracks. This is based on the total number of
times the tag has been applied by Last.fm users since the tagging system was
first introduced and does not necessarily reflect the number of users
currently listening to any of the related "global tag radio" stations.

## Last.fm radio

Last.fm offers customised "radio stations" consisting of uninterrupted audio
streams of individual tracks selected from the music files in the music
library.

Stations can be based on the user's personal profile, the user's "musical
neighbours", or the tracks that the user has marked as loved when listening to
any station. Groups based around common interests or geography also have radio
stations if there are enough members, and tags also have radio stations if
enough music has the same tag. Radio stations can also be created on the fly,
and each artist page allows selection of a "similar artists" or "artist fan"
radio station. (As of December 2006, it is no longer possible to create a
"multiple artist" station i.e. a station based on music similar to that of
more than one artist. Last.fm has cited copyright restrictions as the reason
for this change.[23]

Under the terms of the station's "radio" licence, listeners may not select
specific tracks (except as previews), or choose the order in which they are
played, although any of the tracks played may be skipped or banned completely.
The appropriate royalties are paid to the copyright holders of all streamed
audio tracks according to the law in the UK.

The radio stream uses an MP3 stream encoded at 128 kbit/s 44.1 kHz, which may
be played using the in-page flash player or the downloaded Last.fm client, but
other community-supported players are available as well as a proxy which
allows using a media player of choice.

As part of a programme of improvements in February 2007, registered users are
also able to export the Last.fm Flash player to embed into blogs, personal
websites, Facebook or MySpace pages.[24]

The 24th March 2009, Last.fm announced that Last.fm Radio will require a
subscription of â¬3.00 per month for users living outside the US, the UK and
Germany.[25] This change will take effect 30th March.[26]

### Last.fm player

Last.fm player <IMG>  
Screenshot of the Windows client.  
Developed by Last.fm  
Latest release 1.5.2 / 15 July 2008[27]  
Operating system Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X, Linux, Unix  
Type Media player  
License GNU General Public License  
Website www.last.fm/download  
An "in-page" Flash-based player is provided automatically for all listeners;
it is not necessary to download additional software in order to listen to any
of the music available from the Last.fm music library. It is necessary,
however, to download the Last.fm client if a user also wishes information
about played tracks from their own digital music collection to be included in
their personal music profile.

Prior to August 2005, Last.fm generated an open stream that could be played in
the user's music player of choice, with a browser-based player control panel.
This proved difficult to support and has been officially discontinued. The
Last.fm client is currently the only officially supported music player for
playing customised Last.fm radio streams. The current version combines the
functions of the music player with the plugin that transmits all track data to
the Last.fm server, and effectively replaces the separate Last.fm Player and
the standalone track submission plugins. It is also free software licensed
under the GNU General Public License and available for GNU/Linux, Mac OS X and
Microsoft Windows operating systems.

The player allows the user to enter the name of any artist or tag which then
gives a choice of a number of similar artist stations, or similar global tag
stations. Alternatively, Recommendation radio or any of the user's personal
radio stations may be played without the necessity to visit the website.

The player displays the name of the station and track currently playing, the
song artist, title and track length as well as album details, the artist's
photo and biographical details, album cover art when available, lists of
similar artists and the most popular tags and top fans. There are several
buttons, allowing the user to love, skip, or ban a song. The love button adds
the song to the user's loved tracks playlist; the ban button ensures that the
song will not be played again. Both features affect the user's profile. The
skip button does not. Other buttons allow the user to tag or recommend the
currently playing track. Other features offered by the application are: minor
editing of the user's profile including removing recently played artists and
songs from the loved, banned, or previously played track lists; lists of
friends and neighbours, lists of tags and a list of previously played radio
stations. Users can also open their full Last.fm profile page directly from
the player.

The client also enables the user to install player plugins, these integrate
with various standalone media players to allow the submission of tracks played
in those programs.[28]

In the latest version of the Last.fm Player application, the user can select
to use an external player. When this is done, the Last.fm Player provides the
user with a local URL, through which the Last.fm music stream is proxied.
Users can then open the URL in their preferred media player.

## Audioscrobbler plugin

Last.fm can optionally build a profile directly from a user's music played on
their personal computer. Users must download and install a plugin for their
music player, which will automatically submit the artist and title of the song
after either half the song or the first four minutes have played, whichever
comes first. When the track is shorter than 30 seconds (31 seconds in iTunes)
or the track lacks metadata (ID3, CDDB, etc), the track is not submitted. To
accommodate dial-up users, caching of the data and submitting it in bulk is
also possible.

### List of supported media players

Following applications have native support for sending song information:

  * AlbumPlayer
  * AIMP
  * Amarok
  * aTunes
  * Audacious
  * Banshee
  * Billy
  * BMPx
  * cmus
  * Cog
  * EMMS (Emacs Multimedia System)
  * Exaile
  * Ezmo
  * Helium Music Manager
  * Herrie
  * Listen
  * LobsterTunes
  * MediaMaster
  * MediaPortal
  * MP3Toys
  * MusicIP Mixer
  * Pocket Tunes
  * Songbird
  * Spotify
  * VLC
  * Vox
  * VUPlayer
  * XBoxMediaCenter (XBMC)
  * YamiPod

The following services support sending service-specific recently-played track
feeds:

  * Rhobbler for Rhapsody (beta)

Plugins are available for the following applications:[29]

  * AmigaAMP
  * Banshee
  * Beep Media Player
  * foobar2000
  * DivX Connected[30]
  * gmusicbrowser (unofficial plugin)
  * iTunes
  * LAUNCHcast (via LaunchScrobbler)
  * J. River Media Center
  * MediaMonkey (using Winamp plugin, or official beta plugin)
  * Muine (unofficial plugin)
  * MPD (unofficial)[31][32]
  * musikCube (unofficial beta plugin)
  * MXPlay
  * Noatun
  * Pandora (via the LastFM Firefox Extension, through PandoraFM or with OpenPandora)
  * Pocket Player a music player for Pocket PC and Smartphone devices running the Windows mobile operating system
  * Rhapsody (ScrobRhapsody plugin or RhapScrobbler application)
  * Rhythmbox
  * Spotify
  * Quintessential Player/QCD
  * Quod Libet
  * RealPlayer (unofficial plugin)[33]
  * SlimServer
  * Songbird
  * Winamp
  * Windows Media Player (32-bit)[citation needed]
  * XMMS
  * XMMS2
  * XMPlay
  * Yahoo Music Engine

### Supported audio players (hardware)

There is some support for portable audio players. Since these are off-line
(which breaks the Last.fm concept), track info has to be batch scrobbled.
Players for which batch upload software is available:

  * iPod: The most recent version of the Last.fm software for Windows and Mac (introduced in May 2008) features iPod scrobbling. Although this was introduced in a previous version of Last.fm many users had complained that such features had ceased to function in recent updates.[34]

  *     * Rhythmbox's plugin supports iPod scrobbling
    * Rockbox replacement firmware
    * foobar2000 (Windows) Plugins foo_dop and foo_audioscrobbler combined.
  * iPod Touch and iPhone: With iPod touch and iPhone's firmware version 2.0, Last.fm has created an official client for streaming its music.[35] Alternatively, through the process of Jailbreaking your iPod Touch/iPhone, MobileScrobbler can both stream radio and scrobble tracks via Wi-Fi or an EDGE/3G mobile connection.
  * Frontier Silicon-based connected audio devices.
  * Various other players: supported with the Rockbox firmware - logs made by these players can be uploaded to Last.fm using third party software. Such software includes the web based dap-scrob, and the GUI based Qt4 program QTScrobbler
  * Zenses is an open source utility program for MTP compatible devices such as iriver clix, Toshiba's Gigabeat line, SanDisk's Sansa series, Samsung's YP series, Microsoft Zune, & Creative's Zen players. It lets you submit play counts from the player to Last.fm, view charts on what you've played and create recently added playlists. Zenses was designed and developed for use with Creative's Zen Vision:M media player; however it should also work with most other MTP compatible devices. The development of any further release has been stopped.[36]
  * TrekStor Vibez with scrobbler It'sGotTheVibez

All Audioscrobbler plugins are open source and the listening data it collects
is released under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
License. The data is available from Last.fm's Audioscrobbler site.

## Other third party applications

#### Last.fm supported applications

  * Build Last.fm

As of March 2008, the website has added a section titled "Build" where third
party applications can be submitted for review, and then posted to the
page.[37]

  * SXSW Band-Aid

Last.fm partnered up with the SXSW festival by creating an application
embedded in the corresponding group page that filters the various artists at
the festival by a user's listening statistics, and then uses Last.fm's
recommendation service to also suggest other performing artists that said user
hasn't listened to.[38]

#### Other applications

  * LastFmLib.net (LGPL) for using the Last.fm web services in VB.Net/C#
  * Last.fm Java bindings (BSD) for using the Last.fm web services in Java
  * Last.fm recent tracks widget for Mac OS X displays a user's most recently played tracks.
  * Last.fm widget for Opera also displays a user's most recently played tracks, but works on all platforms Opera runs on.
  * Last.fm dashboard widget for Mac OS X displays a user's last messages in his/her shoutbox.
  * last.tweet widget for Mac OS X displays the cover art of the recently played track, with Twitter integration.
  * FoxyTunes Firefox extension places Last.fm player controls and current song information on the browser status bar.
  * Local.fm creates Last.fm-style playlists using a local music collection and information from Last.fm.
  * ExitAhead finds music on eBay matching a Last.fm profile.
  * Last-Stats shows a user's stats and creates dynamic profile/chart images based on a user's Last.fm profile.
  * The Hype Machine can scrobble songs you are listening to on the Hype Machine web-site.

## Similar services

  * 8tracks.com
  * Anywhere.fm
  * Batanga
  * Blip.fm
  * deezer.com
  * iLike
  * imeem
  * Live365
  * Jamendo
  * MOG
  * Musicovery
  * Pandora
  * Playlist.com
  * Slacker
  * SpiralFrog
  * Spotify
  * Steereo
  * We7
  * Zune Social

## See also

  * List of online music databases
  * List of social networking websites
  * List of Internet stations

## References

  1. ^ "Last.fm Radio Announcement". http://blog.last.fm/2009/03/24/lastfm-radio-announcement. Retrieved on 2009-03-25.
  2. ^ "CBS ups social networking ante with Last.fm acquisition". Computerworld.com. 2007-05-30. http://www.computerworld.com/action/article.do?command=viewArticleBasic&articleId=9021918. Retrieved on 2008-05-26.
  3. ^ "Website offers new view of music". BBC News. 2003-03-27. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/2888431.stm. Retrieved on 2008-02-25.
  4. ^ "EUROPRIX Student Award Winners 2002". EUROPRIX. http://www.europrix.org/europrix/winners/award/Index.htm. Retrieved on 2006-09-03.
  5. ^ http://www.techradar.com/news/audio/portable-audio/digital-music-award-winners-announced-159274
  6. ^ "stereogum: Map Your Way To New Music". Stereogum.com. http://www.stereogum.com/archives/004170.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-15.
  7. ^ Viacom Still Buying Last.fm for $450 Million
  8. ^ "BBC NEWS | Technology | Music site Last.fm bought by CBS". News.bbc.co.uk. Last Updated:. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/6701863.stm. Retrieved on 2008-10-15.
  9. ^ "Last.fm: The Next Generation". Last.fm Blog. 2008-07-17. http://blog.last.fm/2008/07/17/lastfm-the-next-generation. Retrieved on 2008-07-17.
  10. ^ Erick Schonfeld (2008-07-17). "Last.fm's Buggy, New Design - washingtonpost.com". Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/07/17/AR2008071701389.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-23.
  11. ^ "Last.fm makeover criticised - Web User News". http://www.webuser.co.uk/news/news.php?id=263917. Retrieved on 2008-07-23.
  12. ^ "Some Last.fm Users Revolt Over New Look". paidContent:UK. http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-some-lastfm-users-revolt-over-new-look/. Retrieved on 2008-07-23.
  13. ^ Ben Cardew (11:08). "Music Week - Last.fm claims controversial re-design a success". Musicweek.com. http://www.musicweek.com/story.asp?sectioncode=1&storycode=1035180&c=1. Retrieved on 2008-10-15.
  14. ^ "Last.FM Needs More Than A Redesign To Catch Up To Imeem". Techcrunch.com. http://www.techcrunch.com/2008/08/15/lastfm-needs-more-than-a-redesign-to-catch-up-to-imeem/. Retrieved on 2008-10-15.
  15. ^ "Last.fm Secures Series A Funding From Index Ventures". Prnewswire.co.uk. http://www.prnewswire.co.uk/cgi/news/release?id=170159. Retrieved on 2008-10-15.
  16. ^ http://blog.last.fm/2009/03/24/lastfm-radio-announcement
  17. ^ a b "Subscribe". Last.fm. http://www.last.fm/subscribe. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  18. ^ "Last.fm â The Social Music Revolution". Last.fm. http://www.last.fm/help/faq/?category=Artist+Pages#448. Retrieved on 2008-10-15.
  19. ^ Kate Holton (7 February 2007).Warner Music announces Last.fm content dealRetrieved 22 October 2007.
  20. ^ "Warner Music Group Pulls Music from Last.fm | Listening Post from Wired.com". Blog.wired.com. http://blog.wired.com/music/2008/06/warner-music-gr.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-15.
  21. ^ Last.fm October '06 Update. Retrieved on 2007-01-04.
  22. ^ Last.fm January '08. Retrieved on 2008-23-01.
  23. ^ "Where is my multiple artist radio? WTF C'mon guys. â Last.fm Client Support â Last.fm". Last.fm. http://www.last.fm/forum/34905/_/207467/1#f2611611. Retrieved on 2008-10-15.
  24. ^ http://www.last.fm/updates/feb2007
  25. ^ http://blog.last.fm/2009/03/24/lastfm-radio-announcement
  26. ^ http://blog.last.fm/2009/03/24/lastfm-radio-announcement#c007524
  27. ^ "Last.fm latest version log". http://static.last.fm/client/ChangeLog.txt.
  28. ^ JÃ¤levik, Erik (2006-04-03). "Last.fm forum: Read this to get started (old beta!)". http://www.last.fm/group/Audioscrobbler+Beta/forum/30705/_/95809. Retrieved on 2006-09-03.
  29. ^ "Last.fm â The Social Music Revolution". Last.fm. http://www.last.fm/tools/downloads/. Retrieved on 2008-10-15.
  30. ^ [1]
  31. ^ mpdscribble
  32. ^ scmpc
  33. ^ ScrobRealPlayer - Last.FM RealPlayer plugin
  34. ^ "1.4.0.56174 - iPod stopped srcobbling - Last.fm Client Support â Last.fm". Last.fm. http://www.last.fm/forum/34905/_/356777. Retrieved on 2008-10-15. [dubious â discuss]
  35. ^ "Last.fm â the Blog â¢ Last.fm for iPhone and iPod Touch". Blog.last.fm. http://blog.last.fm/2008/07/13/lastfm-for-iphone-and-ipod-touch. Retrieved on 2008-10-15.
  36. ^ "Zenses â Group at Last.fm". Last.fm. http://www.last.fm/group/Zenses. Retrieved on 2008-10-15. [dubious â discuss]
  37. ^ "Last.fm Blog - "Build"". http://blog.last.fm/2008/02/28/build. Retrieved on 2008-03-05.
  38. ^ "Last.fm Blog - "SXSW Band Aid"". http://blog.last.fm/2008/03/02/were-here-to-help-lastfms-sxsw-band-aid. Retrieved on 2008-03-05.

## Further reading

  * Tiny webcaster Last.fm causes major online splash, Rockbites, 22 July 2003
  * Last.fm: Music to Listeners' Ears, Wired, 7 July 2003
  * Website offers new view of music, on Audioscrobbler, BBC News online, 27 March 2003
  * The Musical Myware, Audio presentation by CEO Felix Miller, IT Conversations, 7 March 2006
  * Last.fm interview, Interview with Last.fm co-founder, Martin Stiksel, small WORLD Podcast, 18 October 2006
  * Guardian Unlimited Interview, Guardian Unlimited Interview with Last.fm co-founder, Martin Stiksel, Guardian Unlimited, 4 November 2006
  * Music site Last.fm bought by CBS, BBC News on CBS takeover of Last.fm

## External links

  * Last.fm main page
  * Audioscrobbler development site

v â¢ d â¢ e

CBS Corporation  
Corporate directors

David R. Andelman Â· Joseph A. Califano, Jr. Â· William S. Cohen Â· Philippe
Dauman Â· Charles K. Gifford Â· Bruce S. Gordon Â· Leslie Moonves Â· Shari
Redstone Â· Sumner Redstone Â· Ann N. Reese Â· Judith A. Sprieser  
Radio stations

Broadcast radio stations owned by CBS Radio  
Broadcast television networks

CBS Â· The CW (co-owned with Time Warner)  
Television facilities

CBS Broadcast Center Â· CBS Studio Center Â· CBS Television City Â· Ed
Sullivan Theater  
CBS Paramount Television  
CBS Studios, Inc.

Big Ticket Entertainment Â· CBS Paramount Network Television Â· Spelling
Television Â· CBS Television Distribution  
Television stations

Broadcast TV stations owned by CBS Television Stations  
Cable television networks

Showtime Networks Â· CBS College Sports Network Â· MountainWest Sports Network
(joint-venture with Mountain West Conference and Comcast)  
CBS Interactive

CBS Innertube Â· CNET Networks Â· BNET Â· Download.com Â· FindArticles Â·
GameFAQs Â· Game Rankings Â· GameSpot Â· Last.fm Â· Metacritic Â· MovieTome Â·
MP3.com Â· mySimon Â· TechRepublic Â· TV.com Â· VersionTracker Â· ZDNet Â·
Wallstrip Â· MobLogic Â· MacFixIt  
Simon & Schuster publishing

Simon & Schuster Â· Atria Â· Free Press Â· Howard Â· Pocket Â· Scribner Â·
Strebor Â· Touchstone/Fireside Â· Threshold Editions Â· Aladdin Â· Atheneum Â·
Little Simon Margaret K. McElderry  Â· Simon Pulse Â· Simon Spotlight  
Miscellaneous assets

CBS Consumer Products Â· CBS Records Â· CBS Outdoor Â· Westinghouse Electric
Corporation Â· CBS Operations Â· CBS Home Entertainment Â· CBS Films Â· CBS
Games Â·  
Defunct properties

United Paramount Network  
Annual revenue: â² US$14.07 billion (2007) Â· Stock symbol: NYSE: CBS, NYSE:
CBSA Â· Website: www.cbscorporation.com  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Last.fm"

Categories: 2002 establishments | CBS Interactive websites | Internet
companies of the United Kingdom | Internet radio | Music websites | Online
music and lyrics databases | Online social networking | Virtual communities |
Web 2.0

Hidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Articles with disputed
statements from March 2009 | Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Wikipedia
proseline cleanup | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since September 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Asturianu
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 21:05.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



