
# Mike Gravel

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Mike Gravel  
Mike Gravel  
  
* * *
United States Senator  
from Alaska  
In office  
January 3, 1969 â January 3, 1981  
Preceded by Ernest Gruening  
Succeeded by Frank Murkowski  
* * *
3rd Speaker of the Alaska House of Representatives  
In office  
January 3, 1965 â January 3, 1967  
Governor William Allen Egan  
Preceded by Bruce Biers Kendall  
Succeeded by William K. Boardman  
* * *
Member of the Alaska House of Representatives from the 8th district  
In office  
January 3, 1963 â January 3, 1967  
* * *  
Born May 13, 1930 (1930-05-13) (age 78)  
Springfield, Massachusetts  
Political party Democratic (until 2008)  

Libertarian (2008-present)  
Spouse Rita Martin (divorced)  
Whitney Stewart Gravel  
Profession Real estate development, author  
Religion Unitarian Universalism[1]  
Signature Mike Gravel's signature  
Military service  
Service/branch United States Army  
Years of service 1951-1954  
Rank First Lieutenant  
Maurice Robert "Mike" Gravel (pronounced /grÉËvÉl/) (born May 13, 1930) is
a former Democratic United States Senator from Alaska, who served two terms
from 1969 to 1981, and a former candidate in the 2008 presidential election.

Born and raised in Springfield, Massachusetts to French-Canadian immigrant
parents, Gravel served in the United States Army in West Germany and graduated
from Columbia University. He moved to Alaska in the late 1950s, becoming a
real estate developer and entering politics. He served in the Alaska House of
Representatives from 1963 to 1966 and became its Speaker of the House. Gravel
was elected to the United States Senate in 1968.

As Senator, Gravel became nationally known for his forceful but unsuccessful
attempts to end the draft during the Vietnam War and for having put the
Pentagon Papers into the public record in 1971 despite risk to himself. He
conducted an unusual campaign for the Democratic nomination for Vice President
of the United States in 1972, and then played a crucial role in getting
Congressional approval for the Trans-Alaska pipeline in 1973. He was re-
elected to the Senate in 1974, but gradually alienated most of his Alaskan
constituencies and his bid for a third term was defeated in a Democratic
primary election in 1980.

Gravel returned to business ventures and went through difficult times,
suffering corporate and personal bankruptcies amid poor health. He became a
passionate advocate of direct democracy and the National Initiative. In 2006,
Gravel began a run for the Democratic nomination for President of the United
States in part to promote those ideas. His campaign gained an Internet
following and national attention due to forceful and idiosyncratic debate
appearances during 2007, but showed very little support in national polls or
in 2008 caucuses and primaries. In March 2008, he announced he was switching
to the Libertarian Party and competing for its presidential nomination. In May
2008, he finished fourth at the Libertarian National Convention and announced
his political career had ended.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life, military service, education
  * 2 Move to Alaska
  * 3 State legislator
  * 4 U.S. Senator
    * 4.1 Election to Senate in 1968
    * 4.2 Senate assignments and style
    * 4.3 Nuclear issues and the Cold War
    * 4.4 Vietnam War, the draft, and the Pentagon Papers
    * 4.5 Run for Vice President in 1972
    * 4.6 Re-election to Senate in 1974
    * 4.7 Second term
    * 4.8 Alaskan issues
    * 4.9 Loss of Senate seat in 1980
  * 5 Career after leaving the Senate
    * 5.1 A difficult transition
    * 5.2 Return to politics
    * 5.3 Barnes Review controversy
  * 6 Political positions
  * 7 2008 presidential campaign
    * 7.1 Switch to Libertarian Party
  * 8 After the campaigns
  * 9 Electoral history
  * 10 Writings
  * 11 References
  * 12 External links
    * 12.1 Official Web sites
    * 12.2 Biographical
    * 12.3 Pentagon Papers

  
## [edit] Early life, military service, education

Gravel was born in Springfield, Massachusetts, to French-Canadian immigrant
parents Marie Bourassa and Alphonse Gravel, a painting contractor.[2] His
parents were part of the Quebec diaspora,[3] and he was raised in a working
class neighborhood[4] speaking only French until he was seven years old.[5]
Initially a poor student (due to what he later said was undiagnosed
dyslexia[6][5]), he was educated in parochial schools as a Roman Catholic,
attending Assumption College Preparatory School. He has a sister, Marguerite,
who became a nun,[2] but Gravel himself struggled with Catholicism.[1]

Gravel studied for one year at American International College in
Springfield,[7] then enlisted in the United States Army in 1951 and served in
West Germany as a Special Adjutant in the Communication and Intelligent
Services and as a Special Agent in the Counter Intelligence Corps until
1954,[8][4] eventually becoming a First Lieutenant.[9] He attended Columbia
University's School of General Studies in New York City, where he studied
economics and received a B.S. in 1956.[10] He had come to New York "flat
broke",[9] and supported himself by working as a bar boy in a hotel,[9]
driving a taxicab,[11] and working in the investment bond department at
Bankers Trust.[9] During this time he left the Catholic faith.[1]

## [edit] Move to Alaska

Gravel "decided to become a pioneer in a faraway place,"[9] and moved to pre-
statehood Alaska in 1956, without funds or a job, looking for a place where
someone without social or political connections could be a viable candidate
for public office;[11][5] Alaska's voting age of 19, less than most other
states' 21, played a role,[12] as did its newness[5] and cooler climate.[11]
He found work in several areas, including real estate sales, brakeman for the
Alaska Railroad, and as a very successful property developer on the Kenai
Peninsula.[13][9] He joined the Anchorage Unitarian Universalist fellowship,
and would continue a sporadic relationship with the movement throughout his
life.[1]

Gravel married Rita Jeannette Martin, who had been Anchorage's "Miss Fur
Rendezvous" of 1958,[14] on April 29, 1959.[14] They had two children, Martin
Anthony Gravel and Lynne Denise Gravel,[14] born circa 1960 and 1962
respectively.[12] Meanwhile, he went to Washington, D.C. in 1957 to campaign
for Alaskan statehood via the "Tennessee Plan": dressed as Paul Revere, he
rode with a petition to the steps of the U.S. Capitol.[15] He ran
unsuccessfully for the territorial legislature in 1958.[11] He went on a
national speaking tour concerning tax reform in 1959, sponsored by the
Jaycees.[10] He ran unsuccessfully for the Anchorage City Council in 1960.[11]

## [edit] State legislator

With some newfound wealthy backers,[12] Gravel ran for the Alaska House of
Representatives representing Anchorage in 1962 and won.[11]

Gravel served in the Alaska House of Representatives from 1963 to 1966,
winning re-election in 1964. During 1965 and 1966, he served as the Speaker of
the House, surprising observers by winning that post.[12] As Speaker he
antagonized fellow lawmakers by imposing his will on the legislature's
committees.[12]

He did not run for re-election in 1966, instead choosing to run for Alaska's
seat in the U.S. House of Representatives, losing to four-term incumbent
Democrat Ralph Rivers[11] by 1,300 votes[12] and splitting the Democratic
party in the process.[12]

Following his defeat, Gravel returned to the real estate business in
Anchorage.[12]

## [edit] U.S. Senator

<IMG>

<IMG>

Senator Mike Gravel

### [edit] Election to Senate in 1968

In 1968 he ran against the 81-year-old incumbent Democratic Senator Ernest
Gruening, a popular former governor of the Alaska Territory who was considered
one of the fathers of Alaska's statehood,[11] for his party's nomination to
the U.S. Senate. Gravel's campaign was primarily based on his youth.[12] He
hired Joseph Napolitan, the first self-described political consultant, in late
1966.[12] They spent over a year and a half planning a short primary election
campaign that featured the slogan "Let's do something about the state we're
in"[16] as well as a half-hour, well-produced[11] biographical film of Gravel
that was shown frequently on both television and on home projectors in many
Eskimo villages.[12] The heavy showings quickly reversed a large Gruening lead
in polls into a Gravel lead.[12] Gravel also benefited by being deliberately
ambiguous about his Vietnam policy. Gruening had been one of only two Senators
to vote against the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution and, according to Gravel,
"...all I had to do was stand up and not deal with the subject, and people
would assume that I was to the right of Ernest Gruening, when in point of fact
I was to the left of him."[11]

Gravel unexpectedly beat Gruening in a tight result[17] in the primary and
went on to win the general election, gaining 45 percent of the vote against 37
percent for Republican Elmer E. Rasmuson and 18 percent for Gruening, who ran
a write-in campaign as an Independent.[18]

### [edit] Senate assignments and style

Gravel served on the Environment and Public Works Committee throughout his
Senate career. He also served on the Finance and Interior Committees and he
chaired the Energy, Water Resources, and Environmental Pollution
subcommittees.[19]

By his own admission, Gravel was too new and "too abrasive" to be effective in
the Senate by the usual means of seniority-based committee assignments or
negotiating deals with other senators,[12][20] and was sometimes seen as
arrogant by the more senior members.[12] Gravel instead relied upon attention-
getting gestures to achieve what he wanted, hoping national exposure would
force other senators to listen to him.[20] As part of this he voted with
Southern Democrats to keep the Senate filibuster rule in place,[12] and
accordingly supported Russell Long and Robert Byrd and opposed Ted Kennedy in
Senate leadership battles.[12] In retrospective assessment, University of
Alaska Anchorage history professor Stephen Haycox would say, "Loose cannon is
a good description of Gravel's Senate career. He was an off-the-wall guy, and
you weren't really ever sure what he would do."[21]

### [edit] Nuclear issues and the Cold War

In the late 1960s and early 1970s the U.S. Department of Defense was in the
process of performing tests for the nuclear warhead for the Spartan anti-
ballistic missile interceptor. Two tests, the Milrow and Cannikin tests, were
planned, involving the detonation of nuclear bombs under Amchitka Island in
Alaska. The Milrow test would be a one megaton calibration exercise for the
second, and larger five megaton, Cannikin test, which would measure the
effectiveness of the warhead. Gravel opposed the tests in Congress. Before the
October 1969 Milrow test took place, he wrote that there were significant
risks of earthquakes and other adverse consequences, and called for an
independent national commission on nuclear and seismic safety to be
created;[22] he then made a personal appeal to President Nixon to stop the
test.[23]

After Milrow was conducted, there was continued pressure on the part of
environmental groups against going forward with the larger Cannikin test,
while the Federation of American Scientists claimed the warhead being tested
was already obsolete.[23] In May 1971 Gravel sent a letter to Atomic Energy
Commission hearings held in Anchorage, in which he said the risk of the test
was not worth taking.[24] Eventually a group not involving Gravel took the
case to the U.S. Supreme Court, which declined to issue an injunction against
it,[25] and the Cannikin test took place as scheduled in November 1971.[25]
Gravel had failed to stop the tests (notwithstanding his later claims during
his 2008 presidential campaign[26]).

Nuclear power was considered an environmentally clean alternative for the
commercial generation of electricity and was part of a popular national policy
for the peaceful use of atomic energy in the 1950s and 1960s.[27] Gravel
publicly opposed this policy; besides the dangers of nuclear testing, he was a
vocal critic of the Atomic Energy Commission,[27] which oversaw American
nuclear efforts, and of the powerful United States Congress Joint Committee on
Atomic Energy, which had a stranglehold on nuclear policy and which Gravel
tried to circumvent.[27] In 1971, Gravel sponsored a bill to impose a
moratorium on nuclear power plant construction and to make power utilities
liable for any nuclear accidents;[28] in 1975, he was still proposing similar
moratoriums.[29] By 1974, Gravel was allied with Ralph Nader's organization in
opposing nuclear power.[30]

Six months before United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger's secret
mission to the People's Republic of China in July 1971, Gravel introduced
legislation to recognize and normalize relations with China, including a
proposal for unity talks between China and Republic of China (Taiwan)
regarding the China seat at the United Nations.[31] Gravel reiterated his
position in favor of recognition, with four other senators in agreement,
during Senate hearings in June 1971.[32]

### [edit] Vietnam War, the draft, and the Pentagon Papers

President Richard Nixon had campaigned in 1968 on a promise to end the U.S.
military draft,[33][34] a decision endorsed by the February 1970 report of the
Gates Commission.[33][35] The existing draft law was scheduled to conclude at
the end of June 1971, and the Senate faced a contentious debate about whether
to extend it as the Vietnam War continued.[36] The Nixon administration
announced in February 1971 that it wanted a two-year extension to June 1973,
after which the draft would end;[37][38] Army planners had already been
operating under the assumption of a two-year extension, after which an all-
volunteer force would be in place.[39] Skeptics such as Senate Armed Services
Committee chairman John Stennis thought this unrealistic and wanted a four-
year extension,[37] but the two-year proposal is what went forward in
Congress.[36] By early May 1971, Gravel had indicated his intention to
filibuster the draft renewal legislation, halting conscription and thereby
bringing U.S. involvement in the war to a rapid end.[40]

By June 1971, some Democratic senators opposed to the war wanted to limit the
renewal to a one-year extension, while others wanted to end it
immediately;[36] Gravel reiterated that he was one of the latter, saying,
"It's a senseless war, and one way to do away with it is to do away with the
draft."[36] A Senate vote on June 4 indicated majority support for the two-
year extension.[36] On June 18 Gravel announced again his intention to
counteract that by filibustering the renewal legislation,[41] defending the
practice against those who associated it only with blocking civil rights
legislation.[41] The first filibuster attempt failed on June 23 when, by three
votes, the Senate voted cloture for only the fifth time since 1927.[42]

Protracted negotiations took place over House conference negotiations on the
bill, revolving in large part around Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield's
eventually unsuccessful amendment to tie renewal to a troop withdrawal
timetable from Vietnam; during this time the draft law expired and no more
were conscripted.[43] On August 5, the Nixon administration pleaded for a
renewal before the Senate went on recess, but Gravel successfully blocked
Stennis's attempt to limit debate, and no vote was held.[44] Finally on
September 21, 1971, the Senate invoked cloture over Gravel's second filibuster
attempt by one vote, and then passed the two-year draft extension.[43]
Gravel's attempts to stop the draft had failed[20] (notwithstanding Gravel's
later claims that he had stopped or shortened the draft, taken at face value
in some media reports, during his 2008 presidential campaign[45]).

Meanwhile, on June 13, 1971, The New York Times began printing large portions
of the Pentagon Papers.[46] The papers were a large collection of secret
government documents and studies pertaining to the Vietnam War, of which
former Defense Department analyst Daniel Ellsberg had made unauthorized copies
and was determined to make public.[47] Ellsberg had for a year and a half
approached members of Congress â such as William Fulbright, George McGovern,
Charles Mathias, and Pete McCloskey â about publishing the documents, on the
grounds that the Speech or Debate Clause of the Constitution would give
congressional members immunity from prosecution, but all had refused.[48]
Instead, Ellsberg gave the documents to the Times.

The U.S. Justice Department immediately tried to halt publication, on the
grounds that the information revealed within the papers harmed the national
interest.[47] Within the next two weeks, a federal court injunction halted
publication in The Times; The Washington Post and several other newspapers
began publishing parts of the documents, with some of them also being halted
by injunctions; and the whole matter went to the U.S. Supreme Court for
arguments.[47] Looking for an alternate publication mechanism, Ellsberg
returned to his idea of having a member of Congress read them, and chose
Gravel based on the latter's efforts against the draft;[5] Gravel agreed where
previously others had not. Ellsberg arranged for the papers to be given to
Gravel on June 26[5] via an intermediary, Washington Post editor Ben
Bagdikian.[49] Gravel used his counter-intelligence experience to choose a
midnight transfer in front of the Mayflower Hotel in the center of
Washington.[50]

On the night of June 29, 1971, Gravel attempted to read the papers on the
floor of the Senate as part of his filibuster against the draft, but was
thwarted when no quorum could be formed.[51] Gravel instead convened a session
of the Buildings and Grounds subcommittee that he chaired.[51] He got New York
Congressman John Dow to testify that the war had soaked up funding for public
buildings, thus making discussion of the war relevant to the committee.[52] He
began reading from the papers with the press in attendance,[51] omitting
supporting documents that he felt might compromise national security,[53] and
declaring, "It is my constitutional obligation to protect the security of the
people by fostering the free flow of information absolutely essential to their
democratic decision-making."[53]

He read until 1 a.m., until with tears and sobs he said that he could no
longer physically continue,[53] the previous three nights of sleeplessness and
fear about the future having taken their toll.[5] Gravel ended the session by,
with no other senators present, establishing unanimous consent[52] towards
inserting 4,100 pages of the Papers into the Congressional Record of his
subcommittee.[47][20] The following day, the Supreme Court's New York Times
Co. v. United States decision ruled in favor of the newspapers[47] and
publication in The Times and others resumed. In July 1971, Bantam Books
published an inexpensive paperback edition of the papers containing the
material The Times had published.[54]

Gravel, too, wanted to privately publish the portion of the papers he had read
into the record, believing that "immediate disclosure of the contents of these
papers will change the policy that supports the war."[49] After being turned
down by many commercial publishers,[49] on August 4 he reached agreement with
Beacon Press,[55] the publishing arm of the Unitarian Universalist
Association, of which Gravel was a member.[20] Announced on August 17[54] and
published on October 22, 1971,[49] this four-volume, relatively expensive
set[54] became the "Senator Gravel Edition", which studies from Cornell
University and the Annenberg Center for Communication have labeled as the most
complete edition of the Pentagon Papers to be published.[56][57] The "Gravel
Edition" was edited and annotated by Noam Chomsky and Howard Zinn, and
included an additional volume of analytical articles on the origins and
progress of the war, also edited by Chomsky and Zinn.[57] Beacon Press then
was subjected to a FBI investigation;[50] an outgrowth of this was the Gravel
v. United States court case, which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled upon in June
1972;[50] it held that the Speech or Debate Clause did grant immunity to
Gravel for his reading the papers in his subcommittee, did grant some immunity
to Gravel's congressional aide, but granted no immunity to Beacon Press in
relation to their publishing the same papers.[58]

The events of 1971 changed Gravel in the months following from an obscure
freshman senator in a far corner of the country to a nationally-visible
political figure.[20] He became a sought-after speaker on the college circuit
as well as at political fundraisers,[20] opportunities he welcomed as lectures
were "the one honest way a Senator has to supplement his income."[20] The
Democratic candidates for the 1972 presidential election sought out his
endorsement.[20] In January 1972 Gravel did endorse Maine Senator Ed
Muskie,[59] hoping his endorsement would help Muskie with the party's left
wing and in the ethnic French-Canadian areas in first primary state New
Hampshire[20] (which Muskie would indeed win, but not convincingly, and his
campaign faltered soon thereafter). In April 1972, Gravel appeared on all
three network nightly newscasts to decry the Nixon administration's reliance
on Vietnamization by making reference to the secret National Security Study
Memorandum 1 document, which stated it would take 8â13 years before the Army
of the Republic of Vietnam could defend South Vietnam.[60] Gravel made
excerpts from the study public,[61] but his attempt to read NSSM 1 into the
Congressional Record was blocked by Senators Robert P. Griffin and William B.
Saxbe.[60]

### [edit] Run for Vice President in 1972

Gravel actively campaigned for the office of Vice President of the United
States during the 1972 presidential election, announcing on June 2, 1972, over
a month before the 1972 Democratic National Convention began, that he was
interested in running for the nomination should the choice be opened up to
convention delegates.[62] Towards this end he began soliciting delegates for
their support in advance of the convention.[63] He was not alone in this
effort, as former Governor of Massachusetts Endicott Peabody had been running
a quixotic campaign for the same post[64] since the prior year. Likely
presidential nominee George McGovern was in fact considering the unusual move
of naming three or four acceptable vice-presidential candidates and letting
the delegates choose.[64]

At the convention's final day on July 14, 1972, presidential nominee McGovern
selected and announced Senator Thomas Eagleton of Missouri as his vice-
presidential choice.[65] Eagleton was unknown to many delegates and the choice
seemed to smack of traditional ticket balancing considerations.[65][66] Thus,
there were delegates willing to look elsewhere. Gravel was nominated by Bettye
Fahrenkamp, the national committeewoman of Alaska;[67] He then seconded his
own nomination, breaking down in tears at his own words[68] and maybe trying
to withdraw his nomination.[68] In any case he won 226 delegate votes, coming
in third behind Eagleton and Frances "Sissy" Farenthold of Texas, in chaotic
balloting[69][66] that included several other candidates as well.

For his efforts, Gravel attracted some attention: famed writer Norman Mailer
would say he "provided considerable excitement" and was "good-looking enough
to have played leads in B-films",[70] while Rolling Stone correspondent Hunter
S. Thompson said Gravel "probably said a few things that might have been worth
hearing, under different circumstances ..."[71] Yet, the whole process had
been doubly disastrous for the Democrats. The time consumed with the
nominating and seconding and other speeches of all the vice-presidential
candidates had lost the attention of the delegates on the floor[71] and pushed
McGovern's speech until 3:30 a.m.[71] The haste with which Eagleton had been
selected led to surprise when his past mental health treatments were revealed;
he withdrew from the ticket soon after the convention, to be replaced by
Sargent Shriver.

### [edit] Re-election to Senate in 1974

Several years earlier, Alaska politicians had speculated that Gravel would
have a hard time getting both renominated and elected when his first term
expired,[20] given that he was originally elected without a base party
organization and tended to focus on national rather than local issues.[20]

Nonetheless, in 1974 Gravel was re-elected to the Senate,[72] winning 58
percent of the vote against 42 percent for Republican State Senator C. R.
Lewis, who was a national officer of the John Birch Society.[73]

### [edit] Second term

In June 1976, Gravel was the focus of a federal investigation into allegations
that he was involved in a sex-for-vote arrangement. Congressional staff clerk
Elizabeth Ray (who was already the subject of a sex scandal that led to the
downfall of Representative Wayne Hays) stated that in August 1972, she had sex
with Gravel aboard a houseboat on the Potomac River, under the instruction of
Representative Kenneth J. Gray, her boss at the time.[74] Gray allegedly
wanted to secure Gravel's support for further funding for construction of the
National Visitor Center in Washington, a troubled project that was under the
jurisdiction of subcommittees that both members chaired.[75][76] Another
Congressional staffer said she witnessed the boat encounter, but Gravel said
at the time that he had never met either of the women.[74][77] Both Gravel and
Gray strongly denied that they had made any arrangement regarding
legislation,[74] and neither was ever charged with any wrongdoing.[78] Decades
later, Gravel wrote that he had indeed had sex with Ray, but had not changed
any votes because of it.[79]

### [edit] Alaskan issues

File:Gravel Stevens.jpg

Gravel (left) with fellow Alaska Senator Ted Stevens

By 1971, Gravel was urging construction of the much-argued Trans-Alaska
pipeline, addressing environmental concerns by saying that the pipeline's
builders and operators should have "total and absolute" responsibility for any
consequent environmental damage.[80] Two years later, the debate over the
pipeline came to a crux, with The New York Times describing it as
"environmentalists [in] a holy war with the major oil companies."[81] In
February 1973 the U.S. Court of Appeals blocked the issuance of permits for
construction;[82] Gravel and fellow Alaskan Senator Ted Stevens reacted by
urging Congress to pass legislation overturning the court's decision.[83]
Environmentalists opposed to the pipeline, such as the Environmental Defense
Fund and the Sierra Club[84] then sought to use the recently-passed National
Environmental Policy Act to their advantage;[81] Gravel designed an amendment
to the pipeline bill that would immunize the pipeline from any further court
challenges under that law,[81] and thus speed its construction. Passage of the
amendment became the key battle regarding the pipeline. On July 17, 1973, in a
dramatic roll call vote, the Gravel amendment was approved as a 49â49 tie
was broken in favor by Vice President Spiro Agnew.[84] The actual bill
enabling the pipeline then passed easily;[84] Gravel had triumphed.

In opposition to the Alaskan fishing industry, Gravel advocated American
participation in the formation of the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea. For two years he opposed legislation that established a 200-mile (320
km) Exclusive Economic Zone for marine resources. He was one of only 19
senators to vote against Senate approval for the expanded zone in 1976,[85]
saying it would undermine the U.S. position in Law of the Sea negotiations and
that nations arbitrarily extending their fishing rights limits would "produce
anarchy of the seas."[85] The legislation was passed, and the United States
has signed but never ratified the Law of the Sea treaty.

In the early 1970s Gravel supported a demonstration project that established
links between Alaskan villages and the National Institute of Health in
Bethesda, Maryland, for medical diagnostic communications. Gravel helped
secure a private grant to facilitate the first Inuit Circumpolar Conference in
1977,[86] attended by Inuit representatives from Alaska, Canada, and
Greenland. These conferences now also include representatives from Russia. In
1977, Gravel helped lead an effort to have the U.S. Interior Department rename
Mount McKinley to Denali;[87] this eventually led to Denali National Park
being so named. Subsequently Gravel proposed a never-built "Denali City"
development above the Tokositna River near the mountain, to consist of a giant
Teflon dome enclosing hotels, golf courses, condominiums, and commercial
buildings.[88]

A key, emotional issue in the state at the time was "locking up Alaska",
making reference to allocation of its vast, mostly uninhabited land.[89] In
1978 Gravel blocked passage, via procedural delays[89] such as walking out of
House-Senate conference committee meetings,[90] of a complex bill which
represented a compromise on land use policy. The bill would have put some of
Alaska's vast federal land holdings under state control while preserving other
portions for federal parks and refuges;[11] the action would earn Gravel the
enmity of fellow Alaska Senator Ted Stevens.[11] In 1980, a new lands bill
came up for consideration, that was less favorable to Alaskan interests and
more liked by environmentalists; it set aside 127,000,000 acres (510,000 km2)
of Alaska's 375,000,000 acres (1,520,000 km2) for national parks, conservation
areas, and other restricted federal uses.[91] Gravel blocked it, as not
ensuring enough future development in the state.[91] A new compromise version
of the bill came forward, which reduced the land set aside to 104,000,000
acres (420,000 km2).[89] Gravel, in representation of Alaskan interests, tried
to stop the bill, including staging a filibuster.[11] The Senate, however,
voted cloture and then passed the bill.[92][91] Frustrated, Gravel said "the
legislation denies Alaska its rights as a state, and denies the U.S. crucial
strategic resources,"[91] and commented that the Senate was "a little bit like
a tank of barracudas."[89]

In 1978, Gravel authored and secured the passage into law of the General Stock
Ownership Corporation, that became Subchapter U of the Tax Code under the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954.[93][94] While that was originally done as a
prerequisite to a failed 1980 Alaskan ballot initiative that would have paid
dividends to Alaskan citizens for pipeline-related revenue,[94] it also turned
out to be significant in the development of binary economics.[93]

### [edit] Loss of Senate seat in 1980

Main article: United States Senate election in Alaska, 1980

In 1980, Gravel was challenged for the Democratic Party's nomination by State
Representative Clark Gruening, the grandson of the man Gravel had defeated in
a primary 12 years earlier. Gruening won the bitterly-fought[92] primary, with
about 55 percent of the vote to Gravel's 44 percent.[92] As an insurgent
candidate in 1968, Gravel had never established a firm party base.[17] A group
of Democrats, including future governor Steve Cowper,[95] led the campaign
against Gravel, with Gravel's actions in respect to the 1978 and 1980 Alaskan
lands bills a major issue,[11][92] especially given that the latter's
dÃ©nouement happened but a week before the primary.[89] The sources of
Gravel's campaign funds, some of which came from political action committees
outside the state, also became an issue in the contest.[92] Another factor may
have been Alaska's primary system, which allows unlimited voting across party
lines and from its many independents.[95] Republicans believed Gruening would
be an easier candidate to defeat in the general election.[92] In any case,
Gravel would later concede that by the time of his defeat, he had alienated
"almost every constituency in Alaska."[11]

Gruening lost the general election to Republican Frank Murkowski. Gravel was
the last Democrat to represent Alaska in Congress for 28 years, until
Anchorage Mayor Mark Begich defeated Stevens, by now an aged, iconic figure
who had just been convicted of a felony for taking unreported gifts, in a very
close and protracted election result in mid-November 2008.[96] (The charges
against Stevens were subsequently dropped due to prosecutorial
misconduct.[97])

## [edit] Career after leaving the Senate

### [edit] A difficult transition

Gravel took the 1980 defeat hard, recalling years later: "I had lost my
career. I lost my marriage. I was in the doldrums for ten years after my
defeat,"[98] and "Nobody wanted to hire me for anything important. I felt like
I was worthless. I didn't know what I could do."[5] By his own later
description, Gravel had been a womanizer while in the Senate, and by 1980 his
marriage to his wife Rita had broken up.[99][79] By the early 1980s, they were
divorced; she would later get all of his Senate pension income.[11]

During the 1980s, Gravel was a real estate developer in Anchorage and Kenai,
Alaska,[100] a consultant, and a stockbroker.[11] One of his real estate
ventures, a condominium business, was forced to declare bankruptcy and a
lawsuit ensued.[11] Gravel married his second wife, Whitney Stewart Gravel, a
former administrative assistant for Senator Jacob Javits,[5] in 1984.[101]

### [edit] Return to politics

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mike and Whitney Gravel with their dog Ginger

In 1989, Mike Gravel reentered politics.[11] He founded and led The Democracy
Foundation, which promotes direct democracy.[102]

Gravel led an effort to get a United States Constitutional amendment to allow
voter-initiated federal legislation similar to state ballot initiatives. He
argued that Americans are able to legislate responsibly, and that the Act and
Amendment in the National Initiative would allow American citizens to become
"law makers".

Mike and Whitney Gravel live in Arlington County, Virginia. They have the two
grown children from his first marriage, Martin Gravel and Lynne Gravel Mosier,
and four grandchildren.[103] Whitney Gravel's income has sustained the couple
since 1998.[5] In the 2000s, Gravel suffered poor health, requiring three
surgeries in 2003 for back pain and neuropathy.[11] Due to unreimbursed
medical expenses and debts from his political causes, he declared personal
bankruptcy in 2004.[11][5] He began taking a salary from the non-profit
organizations for which he was working; much of that income was lent to his
presidential campaign. In 2007, he declared that he had "zero net worth."[11]

### [edit] Barnes Review controversy

In June 2003, Gravel gave a speech on direct democracy at a conference hosted
by the American Free Press. The event was cosponsored by the Barnes
Review,[11] a journal that endorses Holocaust denial.[104] In the wake of
criticism for his appearance,[105] Gravel has said repeatedly that he does not
share such a view,[105] stating, "You better believe I know that six million
Jews were killed. I've been to the Holocaust Museum. I've seen the footage of
General Eisenhower touring one of the camps. They're [referring to the Barnes
Review and publisher Willis Carto] nutty as loons if they don't think it
happened".[106] The newspaper had intended to interview Gravel about the
National Initiative. Gravel later recounted the background to the event:

> "He [Carto] liked the idea of the National Initiative. I figured it was an
opportunity to discuss it. Whether it is the far right, far left, whatever,
I'll make my pitch to them. They gave me a free subscription to American Free
Press. They still send it to me today. I flip through it sometimes. It has
some extreme views, and a lot of the ads in it are even more extreme and make
me want to upchuck. Anyways, sometime later, Carto contacted me to speak at
that Barnes Review Conference. I had never heard of the Barnes Review, didn't
know anything about it or what they stood for. I was just coming to give a
presentation about the National Initiative. I was there maybe 30 minutes. I
could tell from the people in the room (mainly some very old men) that they
were pretty extreme. I gave my speech, answered some questions and left. I
never saw the agenda for the day or listened to any of the other
presentations."[106]

The group invited Gravel to speak again, but he declined.[105]

## [edit] Political positions

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mike Gravel with campaign finance reform activist and friend Ethel Granny D
Haddock

Main article: Political positions of Mike Gravel

Gravel has stated that he is an advocate for "a national, universal single-
payer not-for-profit health care system" in the United States which would
utilize vouchers and enable citizens to choose their own doctor.[107] He has
proposed to index veteran health care entitlements to take full account of
increases in the costs of care and medicine.[107] He supports a drug policy
that legalizes and regulates all drugs, treating drug abuse as a medical
issue, rather than a criminal matter.[108] Gravel favors a guest worker
program,[107] supports the FairTax proposal that calls for eliminating the IRS
and the income tax and replacing it with a progressive national sales tax of
23 percent on newly manufactured items and services, retaining progressivity
via all taxes on spending up to the poverty level being refunded to every
household.[107] Gravel has advocated that carbon energy should be taxed to
provide the funding for a global effort to bring together the world's
scientific and engineering communities to develop energy alternatives to
significantly reduce the worldâs energy dependence on carbon.[107] Gravel in
principle does not object to the use of embryonic stem cells for medical
research purposes. He is avowedly pro-choice on the issue of abortion and
women's reproductive rights. He supports constitutional amendments towards
direct democracy.

Gravel's political leanings and convictions are also in his 1972 manifesto,
Citizen Power: A People's Platform.

## [edit] 2008 presidential campaign

Main article: Mike Gravel presidential campaign, 2008

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mike Gravel at the launch of his Presidential campaign in April 2006

At the start of 2006, Gravel decided the best way he could promote direct
democracy and the National Initiative was to run for president.[11] On April
17, 2006,[109] Gravel became the first candidate for the Democratic nomination
for President of the United States in the 2008 election, announcing his run in
a speech to the National Press Club in Washington, D.C. Short on campaign
cash, he took public transportation to get to his announcement.[110] Other
principal Gravel positions were the FairTax, withdrawal of U.S. troops from
Iraq within 120 days, a single payer national health care system, and term
limits.

Gravel campaigned almost full time in New Hampshire, the first primary state,
following his announcement. Opinion polls of contenders for the Democratic
nomination showed Gravel with 1 percent or less support. By the end of March
2007, Gravel's campaign had less than $500 in cash on hand against debts of
nearly $90,000.[111]

Because of his time in the Senate, Gravel was invited to many of the early
Democratic presidential debates. During the initial one at South Carolina
State University on April 26, 2007, he suggested a bill requiring the
president to withdraw from Iraq on pain of criminal penalties. He also
advocated positions such as opposing preemptive nuclear war. He stated that
the Iraq War had the effect of creating more terrorists and that the "war was
lost the day that George Bush invaded Iraq on a fraudulent basis." Regarding
his fellow candidates, he said, "I got to tell you, after standing up with
them, some of these people frighten me â they frighten me."[112] Media
stories said that Gravel was responsible for much of whatever "heat" and
"flashpoints" had taken place.[113][114][112] Gravel gained considerable
publicity by shaking up the normally staid multiple-candidate format; The New
York Times' media critic said that what Gravel had done was "steal a debate
with outrageous, curmudgeonly statements."[115] The Internet was a benefit: a
YouTube video of his responses in the debate was viewed more than 225,892
times, ranking seventeenth in most views for week and first among news and
politics clips;[116] his name became the fifteenth most searched-for in the
blogosphere;[117] and his website garnered more traffic than those of
frontrunners Hillary Rodham Clinton, Barack Obama, or John Edwards.[11] Gravel
appeared on the popular Colbert Report on television on May 2,[11] and his
campaign and career were profiled in national publications such as Salon.[11]
Two wordless, Warholesque campaign videos, "Rock" and "Fire", were released on
YouTube in late May and became hits,[118] and eventually gained over 450,000
and 125,000 views respectively.[119][120] "Rock," in turn, was given airtime
during an episode of The Daily Show with Jon Stewart. Some thirty-five years
after he first achieved the national spotlight, he had found it again.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gravel's fundraising efforts for the first three quarters of 2007.

All this did not improve his performance in the polls; a May 2007 CNN poll
showed him with less than 0.5 percent support among Democrats.[121] Gravel was
in the next several debates, in one case after CNN reversed a decision to
exclude him.[122] Gravel, as with some of the other second-tier candidates,
did not get as much time as the leaders; during the June 2, 2007, New
Hampshire debate, which lasted two hours, he was asked 10 questions and
allowed to speak for five minutes and 37 seconds.[123]

During the July 23, 2007, CNN-YouTube presidential debate, Gravel responded to
audience applause when he had complained of a lack of airtime and said: "Thank
you. Has it been fair thus far?"[124] Detractors began to liken him to "the
cranky uncle who lives in the attic,"[125] or "the angry old guy that just
seemed to want to become angrier."[126] In the ABC News Des Moines, Iowa,
debate of August 19, 2007, moderator George Stephanopoulos noted that Gravel
polled a statistical zero percent support in the state, meaning less than 0.5%
support, and then directed roughly five percent of his questions to
Gravel;[127] in a poll asking who did the best in the debate, Gravel placed
seventh among the eight candidates.[128] National opinion polls of contenders
for the Democratic nomination continued to show Gravel with one percent or
zero percent numbers. By the end of the third-quarter 2007, Gravel had about
$17,500 in cash on hand, had collected a total of about $380,000 so far during
the 2008 election cycle,[129] and was continuing to run a threadbare campaign
with minimal staff.[5]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gravel in Manchester, New Hampshire, two days before the January 8, 2008
Democratic primary there.

Beginning with the October 30, 2007, Philadelphia event, Gravel was excluded
from most of the debates, with the debate sponsors or the Democratic National
Committee saying Gravel's campaign had not met fund-raising, polling, or local
campaign organizational thresholds.[130][131][132] For the Philadelphia
exclusion, Gravel blamed corporate censorship on the part of sponsor owner and
alleged military-industrial complex member General Electric for his
exclusion[133][134] and mounted a counter-gathering and debate against a video
screen a short distance away,[135] but he had lost his easiest publicity. In
reaction, supporters organized "mass donation days" to try to help the
campaign gain momentum and funds, such as on December 5, 2007, the anniversary
of the Repeal of Prohibition.[136]

Gravel did not compete in the initial 2008 vote, the Iowa caucuses,[137] but
was still subjected to a false report from MSNBC that he had pulled out of the
race afterward.[138] Gravel did focus his attention on the second 2008 vote,
the New Hampshire primary. There he received about 400 votes out of some
280,000 cast, or 0.14 percent,[139] before taking time off to improve his
health.[140] He resumed campaigning, but fared no better in subsequent states.
By the end of January 2008, Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, and Gravel were the
only remaining Democrats from the initial debates still running;[141] Gravel
vowed to stay in the presidential campaign until November.[142][143] On March
11, 2008, Gravel continued to remain in the Democratic race but additionally
endorsed a Green Party candidate for president, Jesse Johnson,[144] saying he
wanted to help Johnson prevail against Green Party rivals Cynthia McKinney and
Ralph Nader.[145] By late March, Gravel had almost no fundraising and was only
on the ballot in one of the next ten Democratic primaries.[146]

### [edit] Switch to Libertarian Party

On March 25, 2008, Gravel announced that he would leave the Democrats and join
the Libertarian Party,[147][148] saying: "My libertarian views, as well as my
strong stance against war, the military industrial complex and American
imperialism, seem not to be tolerated by Democratic Party elites who are out
of touch with the average American; elites that reject the empowerment of
American citizens I offered to the Democratic Party at the beginning of this
presidential campaign with the National Initiative for Democracy."[147] The
following day Gravel entered the race for the 2008 Libertarian presidential
nomination,[149] saying that he would have run as a third-party candidate all
along except that he needed the public exposure that came from being in the
earlier Democratic debates.[149] Gravel's initial notion of running as a
fusion candidate with other parties was met with skepticism[150] and not
pursued.

As a Libertarian candidate, Gravel faced resistance to his liberal past and
unorthodox positions;[151] nevertheless, he garnered more support than he had
as a Democrat, placing second and third in two April 2008 straw polls.[152] In
the May 25 balloting at the 2008 Libertarian National Convention in Denver,
Gravel finished fourth out of eight candidates on the initial ballot, with 71
votes out of a total 618; he trailed former Congressman and eventual winner
Bob Barr, author Mary Ruwart, and businessman Wayne Allyn Root.[153] Gravel's
position did not subsequently improve and he was eliminated on the fourth
ballot.[153] Afterwards he stated that "I just ended my political career," but
he vowed to continue promoting his positions as a writer and lecturer.[154]

## [edit] After the campaigns

In June 2008, Gravel endorsed the NYC 9/11 Ballot Initiative, saying the
measure would create a "citizens commission rather than a government
commission" with subpoena power against top U.S. officials to "make a true
investigation as to what happened" regarding the September 11, 2001
attacks.[155][156]

In August 2008, Gravel was speaking to a crowd of supporters of Sami Al-Arian
when he was caught on tape saying of Al-Arian's prosecutor, "Find out where he
lives, find out where his kids go to school, find out where his office is:
picket him all the time. Call him a racist in signs if you see him. Call him
an injustice. Call him whatever you want to call him, but in his face all the
time."[157] Gravel was criticized for potentially involving the children of
the prosecutor, and Al-Arian's family disavowed the sentiments.[157][158]

Gravel defended Alaska Governor Sarah Palin after she was chosen as Republican
presidential nominee John McCain's running mate in September 2008. He praised
Palin's record in standing up to corruption among Alaskan Republicans, thought
her national inexperience was an asset not a detriment, and predicted that the
"Troopergate" investigation into whether she improperly fired a state official
would "come out in her favor."[159] Gravel made clear he would not support or
vote for either McCain-Palin or Obama-Biden in the general election.[159]

## [edit] Electoral history

Main article: Electoral history of Mike Gravel

## [edit] Writings

  * Gravel, Mike. Jobs and More Jobs. Mt. McKinley Publishers, 1968.
  * Gravel, Mike. Citizen Power: A People's Platform. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1972. ISBN 0-030-91465-5. 
    * revised and reissued as Citizen Power: A Mandate for Change, AuthorHouse, 2008. ISBN 1-434-34315-4.
  * Gravel, Mike and Lauria, Joe. A Political Odyssey: The Rise of American Militarism and One Man's Fight to Stop It. Seven Stories Press, 2008. ISBN 1-583-22826-8.
  * Gravel, Mike and Eisenbach, David. The Kingmakers: How the Media Threatens Our Security and Our Democracy. Phoenix Books, 2008. ISBN 1-597-77586-X.
  * Gravel, Mike. Voice of a Maverick: The Speeches and Writings of Senator Mike Gravel. Brandywine House, 2008.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d Mike Gravel's Unitarian Universalism, by Doug Muder, UUWorld, December 10, 2007. Accessed December 19, 2007.
  2. ^ a b "No Shortcuts to the Top (2)", World Voice News, April 30, 2007. Accessed July 20, 2007.
  3. ^ Thernstrom, Stephan (ed.) (1980). Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674375122. pp. 392, 398.
  4. ^ a b Jo-Ann Moriarty, "Springfield native has sights set on top job", The Republican, February 19, 2007. Accessed July 7, 2007.
  5. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Michael Leahy (2007-09-09). "Last". The Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/09/04/AR2007090401794.html?sid=ST2007101600688. Retrieved on 2007-12-20.
  6. ^ Democracy Now, broadcast of forum on "How the Pentagon Papers Came to be Published...", July 2, 2007 [1]
  7. ^ James Stuart Olson, Dictionary of the Vietnam War, Greenwood Press, 1988, p. 174 ff. ISBN 0313249431.
  8. ^ "Mike Gravel and the Draft". Mike Gravel for President. http://www.gravel2008.us/draft. Retrieved on 2007-12-20.
  9. ^ a b c d e f Martin Tolchin (1976-02-27). "Senators From Hinterlands Recall Early Years in City; U.S. Senators Recall Their Early Years in City" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F30E14F83A58167493C5AB1789D85F428785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.
  10. ^ a b Stephen Haycox, Gravel entry in American Legislative Leaders in the West, 1911-1994, Greenwood Press, 1997. ISBN 031330212X. p. 126.
  11. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa Alex Koppelman, "Don't worry, be Mike Gravel", Salon.com, May 7, 2007. Accessed July 4, 2007.
  12. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Warren Weaver, Jr. (1971-07-02). "Impetuous Senator: Maurice Robert Gravel" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F20D10FD3A5B1A7493C0A9178CD85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-24.
  13. ^ Democracy in Action (April 17, 2007). "Interview with Former U.S. Sen. Mike Gravel". National Press Club. http://www.gwu.edu/~action/2008/gravel/gravel041706int.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-29.
  14. ^ a b c Current Biography Yearbook 1972, H.W. Wilson Co., published in collection 1986, p. 184.
  15. ^ Hugh G. (Jerry) Wade (2009-01-05). "In territorial Juneau, statehood fans were a minority". Anchorage Daily News. http://www.adn.com/opinion/compass/story/643638.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-16.
  16. ^ Ron Faucheux (June 1993). "Great slogans: reading between the lines of America's best political rhymes and mottos" (fee required). Campaigns & Elections. http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-14321217.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-02.
  17. ^ a b Robert KC Johnson, "Not Many Senators Have Found Themselves in Joe Lieberman's Predicament", History News Network, August 7, 2006. Accessed July 7, 2007.
  18. ^ Chinn, Ronald E. (September 1969). "The 1968 Election in Alaska". The Western Political Quarterly 22 (3): 456â461. doi:10.2307/446336. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0043-4078(196909)22%3A3%3C456%3AT1EIA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U. Retrieved on 2007-11-25.
  19. ^ "Senator Mike Gravel". National Initiative for Democracy. http://ni4d.us/people/gravel2.htm. Retrieved on 2007-12-20.
  20. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l David E. Rosenbaum (1971-10-26). "Fame Travels With Senator Gravel, the Man Who Read Pentagon Papers Into the Record" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F30A12F73D5E127A93C4AB178BD95F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-24.
  21. ^ David Westphal (2008-01-13). "Gravel the Firebrand". The Miami Herald. http://www.miamiherald.com/540/story/375972.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-16.
  22. ^ "Risks in Alaska Tests" (fee required). Letters to the Editor (The New York Times). 1969-07-31. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=FA0F11F9355E1B7493C3AA178CD85F4D8685F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  23. ^ a b Richard D. Lyons (1971-08-23). "Underground A-Test Is Still Set For Aleutians but Is Not Final" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=FB081FFD3D591A7493C1AB1783D85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  24. ^ "Witnesses Oppose Aleutian H-Blast" (fee required). The New York Times. 1971-05-30. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F1071FFF395B14728FDDA90B94DD405B818BF1D3. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  25. ^ a b "The Amchitka Bomb Goes Off". Time. 1971-11-15. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,903217,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-09.
  26. ^ Gravel claimed during his 2008 presidential campaign that "the Pentagon was performing five calibration tests ... [Gravel] succeeded in halting the program after the second test, limiting the expansion of this threat to the marine environment of the North Pacific." See "Mike Gravel's Legislative Accomplishments". Mike Gravel for President 2008. http://www.gravel2008.us/legislature. Retrieved on 2007-12-30. In actuality, the Milrow and Cannikin tests were the only ones planned and both took place. See "Round 2 at Amchitka". Time. 1971-07-17. http://jcgi.pathfinder.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,905376,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  27. ^ a b c Anthony Ripley (1970-07-16). "Atomic Power: A Bitter Controversy; Atomic Power: A Bitter and Growing Controversy" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F70614F8385C1B7493C4A8178CD85F448785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-31.
  28. ^ "Senator Seeks to Block Atom Plants" (fee required). The New York Times. 1971-02-17. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=FA0D1FFA3A55127B93C5A81789D85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-31.
  29. ^ Gladwin Hill (1975-07-29). "Nuclear Power Development Encounters Rising Resistance With Curbs Sought in a Number of States" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F20614FB3A5E157493CBAB178CD85F418785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-31.
  30. ^ "Nuclear Neighbor" (fee required). Cedar Rapids Gazette. 1974-01-20. http://www.newspaperarchive.com/LandingPage.aspx?type=glpnews&search=nader%20%22mike%20gravel%22%20%22dream%20of%20a%20nation%22&img=39259683.
  31. ^ "Sen. Gravel Urges U.S. to Back Taiwan-Red China Unity Talks" (fee required). The Washington Post. 1971-01-29. http://pqasb.pqarchiver.com/washingtonpost_historical/access/144452802.html?dids=144452802:144452802&FMT=ABS&FMTS=ABS:AI&date=Jan+29%2C+1971&author=&pub=The+Washington+Post%2C+Times+Herald++(1959-1973)&edition=&startpage=A12&desc=Sen.+Gravel+Urges+U.S.+to+Back+Taiwan-Red+China+Unity+Talks. Retrieved on 2007-12-31.
  32. ^ Terence Smith (1971-06-24). "5 SENATORS BACK PEKING SEAT IN U.N.; 4 Urge Admission Even at Cost of Ousting Taiwan" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F70814FC3854127B93C7AB178DD85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-23.
  33. ^ a b Thomas W. Evans (Summer 1993). "The All-Volunteer Army After Twenty Years: Recruiting in the Modern Era". Sam Houston State University. http://www.shsu.edu/~his_ncp/VolArm.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-31.
  34. ^ Ambrose, Stephen (1989). Nixon, Volume Two: The Triumph of a Politician. Simon & Schuster. pp. 264â266.
  35. ^ Griffith, Robert K.; Robert K. Griffith, Jr., John Wyndham Mountcastle (1997). U.S. Army's Transition to the All-volunteer Force, 1868-1974. DIANE Publishing. ISBN 0788178644. http://books.google.com/books?id=yMLjkonemcsC&pg=PA61&dq=laird+%22volunteer+army%22+draft&sig=C7qzd0sWnoEYgbiHL6UlmAkOyk4#PPA40,M1. pp. 40â41.
  36. ^ a b c d e David E. Rosenbaum (1971-06-05). "Senators Reject Limits on Draft; 2-Year Plan Gains" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F40F1EFB3D5A1A7493C7A9178DD85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  37. ^ a b David E. Rosenbaum (1971-02-03). "Stennis Favors 4-Year Draft Extension, but Laird Asks 2 Years" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F50C12FD3A55127B93C1A91789D85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  38. ^ Robert C. Maynard (1971-02-03). "Laird Briefs Hill On Volunteer Army" (fee required). The Washington Post. http://proquest.umi.com/pdf/7d9c5e69bcdcbe29d972a3df32460be1/1202571045/share1/pqimage/hnirs3/20080209100048240/9442/out.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-02-09.
  39. ^ Griffith et. al., U.S. Army's Transition to the All-volunteer Force, p. 51.
  40. ^ John W. Finney (1971-05-09). "Congress vs. President" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F60E11F6345F127A93CBA9178ED85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-31.
  41. ^ a b Mike Gravel (1971-06-22). "Filibustering the Draft" (fee required). Letters to the Editor (The New York Times). http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=FA081EF73B5B1A7493C0AB178DD85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  42. ^ David E. Rosenbaum (1971-06-24). "Senate Votes Closure in Draft Debate, 65 to 27" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F70B1EFF3854127B93C6AB178DD85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  43. ^ a b David E. Rosenbaum (1971-09-22). "Senate Approves Draft Bill, 55-30; President to Sign" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F50B10FD385C1A7493C0AB1782D85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  44. ^ "'72 Draft Lottery Assigns No. 1 to Those Born Dec. 4" (fee required). The New York Times. 1971-08-06. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F60C1EF8395C1A7493C4A91783D85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  45. ^ During Gravel's 2008 presidential campaign, he would claim that, "In 1971, Senator Mike Gravel (D-Alaska), by waging a lone five month filibuster, singlehandedly ended the draft in The United States thereby saving thousands of lives." See "Mike Gravel and the Draft". Mike Gravel for President 2008. http://www.gravel2008.us/draft. Retrieved on 2007-12-30. A 2006 article in The Nation stated that "It was Gravel who in 1971, against the advice of Democratic leaders in the Senate, launched a one-man filibuster to end the peacetime military draft, forcing the administration to cut a deal that allowed the draft to expire in 1973." See John Nichols (2006-04-15). "Pentagon Papers Figure Bids for Presidency". The Nation. http://www.commondreams.org/views06/0415-24.htm. Retrieved on 2007-12-20. Neither of these assessments is correct. From the beginning of the draft review process in February 1971, the Nixon administration wanted a two-year extension to June 1973, followed by a shift to an all-volunteer force â see David E. Rosenbaum (1971-02-03). "Stennis Favors 4-Year Draft Extension, but Laird Asks 2 Years" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F50C12FD3A55127B93C1A91789D85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-30. ; for confirmation, see "Once More, "Greetings"". Time. 1971-10-04. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,905414,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-02. â and this is what is what the September 1971 Senate vote gave them. Gravel's goal had been to block the renewal of the draft completely, thereby ending conscription past June 1971. See Mike Gravel (1971-06-22). "Filibustering the Draft" (fee required). Letters to the Editor (The New York Times). http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=FA081EF73B5B1A7493C0AB178DD85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-29. In Gravel's 2008 memoir, he conceded that he failed to bring about the immediate end of the war that he wanted, and that Nixon had gotten the two-year extension he had originally asked for. However, Gravel wrote that he had never trusted Nixon's pledge to only extend the draft for two years, and that when Nixon let the draft expire in 1973 it was the threat of a renewed filibuster that caused him to stick to the pledge. See Gravel and Lauria, A Political Odyssey, p. 180. No other accounts support this interpretation; in fact, Nixon had first become interested in the idea of an all-volunteer army during his time out of office, and he saw ending the draft as an effective way to undermine the anti-Vietnam war movement, since he believed affluent youths would stop protesting the war once their own possibility of having to fight in it was gone. See Aitken, Jonathan (1996). Nixon: A Life. Regnery Publishing. ISBN 0895267209. pp. 396â397. and Ambrose, Nixon, Volume Two: The Triumph of a Politician, pp. 264â266.
  46. ^ Neil Sheehan (1971-06-13). "Vietnam Archive: Pentagon Study Traces 3 Decades of Growing U. S. Involvement" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F10B1FFD3D5813748DDDAA0994DE405B818BF1D3. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  47. ^ a b c d e "Timeline". Top Secret: The Battle for the Pentagon Papers. Annenberg Center for Communication at University of Southern California. http://www.topsecretplay.org/index.php/content/timeline. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  48. ^ Rudenstine, David (1996). The Day the Presses Stopped: A History of the Pentagon Papers Case. University of California Press. ISBN 0520213823. pp. 46, 391.
  49. ^ a b c d "Beacon Press & the Pentagon Papers: History". Beacon Press. 2006-10-22. http://www.beacon.org/client/pentagonpapers.cfm. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  50. ^ a b c Warren R. Ross (September/October 2001). "A courageous press confronts a deceptive government". UU World. http://www.uuworld.org/ideas/articles/6394.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  51. ^ a b c David E. Rosenbaum (1971-06-30). "Gravel Speaks 3 Hours; Senator Reading Study to Press" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F60617FC395C1A7493C2AA178DD85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  52. ^ a b Prados, John; Porter, Margaret Pratt (eds.) (2004). Inside the Pentagon Papers. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 0-7006-1325-0. p. 60.
  53. ^ a b c John W. Finney (1971-07-01). "Action by Gravel Vexes Many Senators" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F70B14FC3A5B1A7493C3A9178CD85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  54. ^ a b c "Church Plans 4-Book Version of Pentagon Study" (fee required). The New York Times. 1971-08-18. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F50D14F9355B1A7493CAA81783D85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  55. ^ "Letter from Gravel to Beacon Press". Beacon Press. 1971-08-04. http://www.beacon.org/client/client_pages/images/stair_ltr.jpg. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  56. ^ Kahn, George McT. (June 1975). "The Pentagon Papers: A Critical Evaluation". American Political Science Review 69 (2): 675â684. doi:10.2307/1959096. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-0554(197506)69%3A2%3C675%3ATPPACE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-O. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  57. ^ a b "Resources". Top Secret: The Battle for the Pentagon Papers. Annenberg Center for Communication at University of Southern California. http://www.topsecretplay.org/index.php/content/resources. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  58. ^ "Gravel v. United States". Jrank.org. http://law.jrank.org/pages/12642/Gravel-v-United-States.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  59. ^ "More Muskie Support" (fee required). The New York Times. 1972-01-15. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F00D16F83C591A7493C7A8178AD85F468785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-24.
  60. ^ a b Oudes, Bruce (1989). From the President: Richard Nixon's Secret Files. Harper & Row. ISBN 0060916214. p. 428.
  61. ^ Tad Szulc (1972-04-26). "1969 Study Shows War Policy Split" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=FB081FFB3455127B93C4AB178FD85F468785F9.
  62. ^ "Senator Gravel to Seek Vice-Presidential Spot" (fee required). Associated Press. The New York Times. 1972-06-03. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F10910F63B591A7493C1A9178DD85F468785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-23.
  63. ^ Steven V. Roberts (1972-06-28). "Uncommitted Delegate in the Spotlight" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F70A11FA345A137B93CAAB178DD85F468785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-23.
  64. ^ a b James M. Naughton (1972-07-09). "The Air Went Out Of the Whoopee Cushions" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F20F10FB3E5E127A93CBA9178CD85F468785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-23.
  65. ^ a b Max Frankel (1972-07-14). "Impassioned Plea: Dakotan Urges Party to Lead the Nation in Healing Itself McGovern Names Eagleton Running Mate; Calls Nixon 'Fundamental Issue'" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F00910F93C5A137A93C6A8178CD85F468785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-23.
  66. ^ a b "The Foregone Convention". The Nation. July 24, 1972. http://ssl.thenation.com/doc/19720724/sherrill/2.
  67. ^ Sheila Hixson, Ruth Rose (eds.), ed (1972). The Official Proceedings of the Democratic National Convention, 1972. Democratic National Committee. p. 8.
  68. ^ a b David S. Broder (1987-09-06). "Filling Nostalgia Gap with Democratic Stars of the Past 20 Years". The Washington Post. http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P2-8026532.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-02.
  69. ^ Ken Rudin (2004-09-27). "The Worst Acceptance Speech?". Political Junkie. NPR. http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=3903470. Retrieved on 2007-11-19.
  70. ^ Mailer, Norman (1983). St. George and the Godfather. Arbor House. ISBN 0877955638.
  71. ^ a b c Thompson, Hunter S. (1973). Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail '72. New York: Popular Library. pp. 319â320.
  72. ^ Wallace Turner (1974-11-07). "Alaska Governor's Contest in Doubt" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F00613FB3D5B147B93C5A9178AD95F408785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-23.
  73. ^ "John Birch Official Seeks to Replace Gravel in Alaska" (fee required). United Press International. The New York Times. 1974-01-11. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F00B1EF93C5B1A7493C3A8178AD85F408785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-23.
  74. ^ a b c Crewdson, John M. (1976-06-12). "U.S. Studies Charge Of Sex-for-Vote Bid". The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F10912FE3F5B167493C0A8178DD85F428785F9.
  75. ^ "Miss Ray Said to Link Tryst to Building Project". Associated Press. The New York Times. 1976-06-13. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F50B13FB3D5A107B93C1A8178DD85F428785F9.
  76. ^ Maureen Dowd (1982-10-25). "In Washington, D.C.: Last Stop for Union Station". Time. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,953582-1,00.html.
  77. ^ Oelsner, Lesley (1976-06-14). "Rep. Howe Held on Sex Charge in Utah; Gravel Denies Sex on Boat With Miss Ray". The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F20B10F83C5A167493C6A8178DD85F428785F9.
  78. ^ Steven Rattner (1978-05-08). "Now Washington Wants Its Station Back". The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F20F12F6395413728DDDA10894DD405B888BF1D3.
  79. ^ a b Gravel and Lauria, A Political Odyssey, pp. 196â197.
  80. ^ "Senator Supports Pipeline; Would Make Operator Liable" (fee required). United Press International. The New York Times. 1971-02-18. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F30D12F63454127B93CAA81789D85F458785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  81. ^ a b c Edward Cowan (1973-07-14). "Senate, 61-29, Blocks Bid to Delay Alaska Pipeline" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F50E15F9385C1A7A93C6A8178CD85F478785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  82. ^ "U.S. Court Blocks Permits to Build Alaskan Pipeline" (fee required). Reuters. The New York Times. 1973-02-10. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F50812FA3C54137A93C2A81789D85F478785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  83. ^ "Morton Hints Congress Bid To Clear Alaskan Pipeline" (fee required). United Press International. The New York Times. 1973-02-16. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F20F1EF73C5C1A7A93C4A81789D85F478785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  84. ^ a b c Edward Cowan (1973-07-18). "Senate, 77-20, Votes For Alaska Pipeline; Court Test Barred, With 49-to-49 Tie Broken by Agnew" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=FB0613FD3859137A93CAA8178CD85F478785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  85. ^ a b David Binder (1976-01-29). "Senate Approves a 200-Mile Limit on Fishing Rights" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=F30913FC385A1A7493CBAB178AD85F428785F9. Retrieved on 2007-12-31.
  86. ^ Eben Hopson (1976-10-22). "Speech Before the Alaska Federation of Natives Convention". ebenhopson.com. http://www.ebenhopson.com/papers/1976/AFNConfabSpeech.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-31.
  87. ^ "Pique over the Continent's Tallest Peak". Time. 1977-11-07. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,947952,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-02.
  88. ^ Joel Connelly (2002-09-13). "In Alaska, Big Schemes Often Yield Empty Dreams" (fee required). Seattle Post-Intelligencer. http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-91517275.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-02.
  89. ^ a b c d e Wallace Turner (1980-08-26). "Polls Indicate Gravel Is in Trouble In Alaska's Senate Primary Today" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=FA0F17FF355F12728DDDAF0A94D0405B8084F1D3. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.
  90. ^ "Birth and Death In the Night". Time. 1978-10-30. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,912207,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-02.
  91. ^ a b c d "Ah, Wilderness! Ah, Development!". Time. 1980-11-24. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,952829-1,00.html. Retrieved on 2002-02-02.
  92. ^ a b c d e f Wallace Turner (1980-08-28). "Gravel Loses a Bitter Fight In Senate Primary in Alaska" (fee required). The New York Times. http://select.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=FB0817FA355F12728DDDA10A94D0405B8084F1D3. Retrieved on 2007-12-10.
  93. ^ a b "Important Dates in the History of Binary Economics". Kelso Institute. 2000. http://www.kelsoinstitute.org/important-dates.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-31.
  94. ^ a b Gauche, Jerry N. (2000). "Binary Economic Modes for the Privatization of Public Assets" (PDF). Journal of Socio-Economics 27 (3): 445â459. doi:10.1016/S1053-5357(99)80098-5. http://kelsoinstitute.org/pdf/binaryeconomicmodes.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-12-31.
  95. ^ a b Wallace Turner, "Side Issues Figure in Tricky Alaska Primary", The New York Times, July 6, 1982. Retrieved July 7, 2007.
  96. ^ Kane, Paul (2008-11-19). "Ted Stevens Loses Battle For Alaska Senate Seat". The Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/11/18/AR2008111803227.html?hpid%3Dtopnews&sub=AR. Retrieved on 2008-11-19.
  97. ^ Berger, Judson (2009-04-03). "Special 'Rerun' Alaska Senate Election Highly Unlikely". Fox News. http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2009/04/03/special-election-alaska-senate-seat-appears-unlikely/. Retrieved on 2009-04-05.
  98. ^ Politics1, "P2008: An Interview With Presidential Candidate Mike Gravel" by Ron Gunzburger, April 17, 2006.
  99. ^ Leonard Jacobs (2008-07-08). "Q&A: Mike Gravel". Metromix. http://newyork.metromix.com/events/article/q-and-a-mike/492923/content. Retrieved on 2008-07-20.
  100. ^ Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, Mike Gravel profile
  101. ^ Gravel and Lauria, A Political Odyssey, p. 243.
  102. ^ "First Democrat to Announce Candidacy for President on Monday", Joe Lauria, CommonDreams New Centre, Published April 13, 2006.
  103. ^ "Mike Gravel Biography". Mike Gravel for President 2008. http://www.gravel2008.us/bio. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  104. ^ Alex Grobman, Rafael Medoff. "Holocaust Denial: A Global Survey - 2003". David S. Wyman Institute for Holocaust Studies. http://wymaninstitute.org/articles/2003-denialreport.php. Retrieved on 2009-12-29.
  105. ^ a b c Alan Tuttle (August 2007). "Interview with Senator Mike Gravel". Philadelphia Jewish Voice. http://www.pjvoice.com/v26/26300words.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-01-01.
  106. ^ a b Ron Gunzburger (2006-04-17). "An Interview with Presidential Candidate Mike Gravel". Politics1.com. http://www.politics1.com/blog-0406a.htm. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  107. ^ a b c d e "How Mike Stands on the Issues". Mike Gravel for President 2008. http://www.gravel2008.us/issues. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  108. ^ "Fmr. Sen. Mike Gravel: Unfiltered". Iowa Independent. 2007-05-14. http://www.iowaindependent.com/showDiary.do?diaryId=131. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  109. ^ "Washington: A 'Maverick' For President". The New York Times. 2006-04-18. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9A01EED8173FF93BA25757C0A9609C8B63. Retrieved on 2007-12-24.
  110. ^ Philip Elliot, "Ex-Alaska Sen. Gravel Runs for President", Associated Press, April 17, 2006. Accessed March 10, 2007.
  111. ^ "FEC Form 3P for Mike Gravel". Federal Election Commission. 2007-04-15. http://query.nictusa.com/cgi-bin/dcdev/forms/C00423202/285065/. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  112. ^ a b No Breakout Candidate at Democratic Debate, ABC News, Apr. 26, 2007
  113. ^ "Clinton edges ahead after first Democratic debate", The Times, April 27, 2007.
  114. ^ Hillary Clinton shines in Democratic candidates' debate, Ewen MacAskill, The Guardian, April 27, 2007.
  115. ^ Alessandra Stanley (2007-05-04). "A Show Where Candidates Are More Prop Than Player". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/05/04/us/politics/04tvwatch.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-28.
  116. ^ "p. Mike Gravel at the Democratic Debate". This video has been removed due to terms of use violation. YouTube. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1gMlHv2lDqA. Retrieved on 2007-05-04. It was also ranked #7 top rated (for week), #23 top favored (for week), #25 most discussed (for week), #4 most linked (for week), and #1 top rated - news and politics (for week).
  117. ^ Mark Memmott, Jill Lawrence (2007-04-30). "Mike Gravel, soon to be a household name". USA Today. http://blogs.usatoday.com/onpolitics/2007/04/mike_gravel_soo.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-28.
  118. ^ Lisa Tozzi (2007-06-18). "Mike Gravel: Behind the Music". The New York Times. http://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/2007/06/18/mike-gravel-behind-the-music/. Retrieved on 2008-02-15.
  119. ^ (2007-05-27). Mike Gravel - Rock. YouTube. Retrieved on 2008-02-15.
  120. ^ (2007-05-28). Mike Gravel - Fire. YouTube. Retrieved on 2008-02-15.
  121. ^ Bill Schneider (2007-05-07). "Poll: Liberals moving toward Clinton; GOP race tightens". CNN.com. http://www.cnn.com/2007/POLITICS/05/07/schneider.2008.polls/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  122. ^ Mike Gravel for President 2008 (2007-03-19). Gravel Dismisses CNN, WMUR-TV And Union Leader Statement. Press release. http://www.gravel2008.us/?q=node/471. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  123. ^ Mike Gravel for President 2008 (2007-06-05). "The Mainstream Media Has Gone Underground...". Press release. http://www.gravel2008.us/?q=node/1360. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  124. ^ "Part I: CNN/YouTube Democratic presidential debate transcript". CNN.com. 2007-07-24. http://www.cnn.com/2007/POLITICS/07/23/debate.transcript/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-28.
  125. ^ Rick Pearson (2008-01-07). "Mike Gravel to teens: Say 'yes' to drugs". Baltimore Sun. http://weblogs.baltimoresun.com/news/politics/blog/2008/01/mike_gravel_tells_teens_do_pot.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-09.
  126. ^ Dan Harrie (2008-01-22). "Democratic hopeful Gravel visits Park City". The Salt Lake Tribune. http://www.sltrib.com/news/ci_8043044. Retrieved on 2008-02-01.
  127. ^ "Statistical Analysis Shows ABC News Unfair in Democrat Debate". NewsBusters. 2007-08-24. http://newsbusters.org/blogs/p-j-gladnick/2007/08/24/statistical-analysis-shows-abc-news-unfair-democrat-debate. Retrieved on 2007-12-28.
  128. ^ "ABC News Poll" August 19, 2007, ABC News
  129. ^ "Report for Mike Gravel for President 2008". Federal Election Commission. 2007-10-17. http://query.nictusa.com/pres/2007/Q3/C00423202.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  130. ^ Alex Johnson (2007-10-31). "Democratic rivals target Clintonâs vote on Iran". MSNBC.com. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/21548813/. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  131. ^ "CNN keeps Gravel out of Democratic debate in Las Vegas". Associated Press. Las Vegas Sun. 2007-11-07. http://www.lasvegassun.com/sunbin/stories/nevada/2007/nov/07/110710306.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  132. ^ "Kucinich booted from Iowa debate". The Hill. December 12, 2007. http://thehill.com/campaign-2008/kucinich-booted-from-iowa-debate-2007-12-12.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-14.
  133. ^ Mike Gravel (2007-10-30). "Corporate Censorship!". Mike Gravel for President 2008. http://www.gravel2008.us/?q=node/2510. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  134. ^ Sarah Wheaton (2007-10-30). "Gravel vs. MSNBC". http://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/2007/10/30/gravel-vs-msnbc/. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  135. ^ Larry Eichel (2007-10-30). "The debate is on. Here. Tonight.". philly.com. http://www.philly.com/philly/news/breaking/20071030_Democratic_debate_starts_at_9.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  136. ^ "December 5 Is "Mass Donation Day" For Mike Gravel". The Presidential Candidates. 2007-12-04. http://www.thepresidentialcandidates.us/2007/12/december-5-is-mass-donation-day-for.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-04.
  137. ^ "Second-Tier Dems Hope for Caucus Boost". WHO-TV. 2008-01-03. http://www.whotv.com/Global/story.asp?S=7572270. Retrieved on 2008-01-04.
  138. ^ J. Skyler McKinley (2008-01-04). "We're Still in the Race!". Mike Gravel for President 2008. http://www.gravel2008.us/content/were-still-race. Retrieved on 2008-01-04.
  139. ^ "Election Center 2008: Primary Results for New Hampshire". CNN. 2008-01-09. http://www.cnn.com/ELECTION/2008/primaries/results/state/#NH. Retrieved on 2008-01-09.
  140. ^ "Mike Gravel to campaign on". Associated Press. 2008-01-08. http://www.boston.com/news/local/new_hampshire/articles/2008/01/08/former_alaska_senator_to_keep_campaigning/?rss_id=Boston.com%20--%20Top%20political%20stories. Retrieved on 2008-01-08.
  141. ^ Sarah Morrison (2008-02-07). "Candidate Speaks to Political Science Class". The Daily Californian. http://www.dailycal.org/article/100285/candidate_speaks_to_political_science_class. Retrieved on 2008-02-07.
  142. ^ Isaac Arnsdorf (2008-02-13). "Gravel urges direct democracy at YPU". Yale Daily News. http://www.yaledailynews.com/articles/view/23498. Retrieved on 2008-02-15.
  143. ^ Joel Stein (2008-03-04). "The Third Democrat in the Race". Time. http://www.time.com/time/politics/article/0,8599,1719305,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-09.
  144. ^ "Mike Gravel endorses Jesse Johnson (Green Party) for President". Third Party Watch. 2008-03-11. http://thirdpartywatch.com/2008/03/11/mike-gravel-endorses-jesse-johnson-green-party-for-president/. Retrieved on 2008-03-12.
  145. ^ David Weigel (2008-03-18). "Several Minutes with Mike Gravel". Reason. http://reason.com/blog/show/125552.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-24.
  146. ^ Amy Hollyfield (2008-03-27). "Mike Gravel has gone from long shot to no shot for presidency". St. Petersburg Times. http://www.tampabay.com/news/politics/elections/article432763.ece. Retrieved on 2008-05-26.
  147. ^ a b "Former U.S. Senator Mike Gravel joins Libertarian Party ranks". Libertarian Party. 2008-03-25. http://www.lp.org/media/article_573.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-03-25.
  148. ^ Mike Gravel (2008-03-26). "A Personal Message from Mike". Mike Gravel for President 2008. http://www.gravel2008.us/content/personal-message-mike. Retrieved on 2008-03-26.
  149. ^ a b Sarah Elkins (2008-03-31). "Maverick Mike". Newsweek. http://www.newsweek.com/id/129467/. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  150. ^ Josh Gerstein (2008-03-27). "Barr, Gravel Eye Libertarian Nod for President". The New York Sun. http://www.nysun.com/national/barr-gravel-eye-libertarian-nod-for-president/73744/. Retrieved on 2008-05-26.
  151. ^ Philip Klein (2008-05-21). "Will the Real Libertarian Please Stand Up?". The American Spectator. http://www.spectator.org/dsp_article.asp?art_id=13249. Retrieved on 2008-05-26.
  152. ^ "Straw Poll Results". Mike Gravel for President 2008. 2008-04-08. http://www.gravel2008.us/content/straw-poll-results. Retrieved on 2008-04-08.
  153. ^ a b "Press Releases: Presidential and VP Vote Totals - Updated Live!". LP.org. 2008-05-25. http://www.lp.org/media/printer_588.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-05-25.
  154. ^ "Libertarians Pick Barr as Presidential Nominee". Fox News. 2008-05-25. http://elections.foxnews.com/2008/05/25/libertarians-pick-barr-as-presidential-nominee/. Retrieved on 2008-05-25.
  155. ^ Jefferson Siegel (June 18-24, 2008). "âPentagon Papers senatorâ calls for new 9/11 probe". The Villager. http://www.thevillager.com/villager_268/pentagonpapers.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-20.
  156. ^ Amy Goodman (2008-06-17). "Former Senator Mike Gravel Calls for Independent 9/11 Investigation and Prosecution of President Bush and Vice President Cheney". Democracy Now! (Pacifica Radio). http://www.democracynow.org/2008/6/17/former_senator_mike_gravel_calls_for. Retrieved on 2008-06-22.
  157. ^ a b "Former Presidential Candidate Urges Crowd to Stalk Federal Prosecutor". Fox News. 2008-08-05. http://elections.foxnews.com/2008/08/05/former-presidential-candidate-urges-crowd-to-stalk-federal-prosecutor/. Retrieved on 2008-08-19.
  158. ^ Barakat, Matthew (2008-08-08). "Al-Arian trial postponed as judge questions case". Fox. http://www.foxnews.com/wires/2008Aug08/0,4670,AttacksProfessor,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-18.
  159. ^ a b "Interview with Mike Gravel". 2008 Election Center (Pacifica Radio). 2008-09-01. http://election411.org/article/id/3601160/interview-mike-gravel. Retrieved on 2009-03-02.

  * The Pentagon Papers Senator Gravel Edition. Vol. Five. Critical Essays. Boston. Beacon Press, 1972. 341p. plus 72p. of Index to Vol. IâIV of the Papers, Noam Chomsky, Howard Zinn, editors.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Mike Gravel  
Sister project Wikinews has related news: Mike Gravel  
### [edit] Official Web sites

  * Gravel for President
  * Gravel2008 Youtube Channel
  * Gravel Blogspot
  * Official Myspace
  * National Initiative for Democracy (Founded by Mike Gravel)

### [edit] Biographical

  * Mike Gravel at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
  * Mike Gravel at the Open Directory Project
  * Biographical entry at The Democracy Foundation
  * Genealogy of Mike Gravel

### [edit] Pentagon Papers

  * Gravel edition of the Pentagon Papers Complete text, with supporting documents
  * Unedited footage of Senator Gravel reading the Pentagon Papers in the Senate in 1971 Streaming and download links at archive.org
  * Democracy Now! Special: "How the Pentagon Papers Came to Be Published by the Beacon Press": Mike Gravel and Daniel Ellsberg (audio/video and transcript)

Political offices  
Preceded by  
Bruce Biers Kendall Speaker of the Alaska House of Representatives  
1965 â 1966 Succeeded by  
William K. Boardman  
United States Senate  
Preceded by  
Ernest Gruening United States Senator (Class 3) from Alaska  
1969 â 1981  
Served alongside: Ted Stevens Succeeded by  
Frank Murkowski  
Party political offices  
Preceded by  
Ernest Gruening Democratic Party nominee for Senator from Alaska  
(Class 3)  
1968 (won), 1974 (won) Succeeded by  
Clark Gruening  
v â¢ d â¢ e

United States Senators from Alaska  
Class 2: Bartlett â¢ Stevens â¢ Begich  
Class 3: Gruening â¢ Gravel â¢ F. Murkowski â¢ L. Murkowski

United States Senate  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Speakers of the Alaska House of Representatives  
Taylor Â· Kendall Â· Gravel Â· Boardman Â· Kerttula Â· Guess Â· Fink Â·
Bradner Â· Malone Â· Gardner Â· Duncan Â· Hayes Â· Grussendorf Â· Cotten Â·
Grussendorf Â· Barnes Â· Phillips Â· Porter Â· Kott Â· Harris

Flag of Alaska  
v â¢ d â¢ e

United States presidential election, 2008  
United States elections, 2008 Â· Candidates (Comparison) Â· Debates Â·
Congressional support Â· Fundraising Â· Ballot access Â· Timeline Â· Super
Tuesday Â· Potomac primary Â· Super Tuesday II Â· General polls Â· Statewide
general polls Â· International polls Â· International reaction  
Democratic Party  
Convention Â· Primary polls  
General polls Â· Debates Â· Primaries  
Primary results Â· Superdelegates

Nominee: Barack Obama (campaign Â· positions Â· transition)  
VP nominee: Joe Biden (positions)  
Former candidates: Evan Bayh Â· Joe Biden (campaign) Â· Hillary Rodham Clinton
(campaign) Â· Chris Dodd (campaign) Â· John Edwards (campaign) Â· Mike Gravel
(campaign) Â· Dennis Kucinich (campaign) Â· Dal LaMagna Â· Bill Richardson
(campaign) Â· Tom Vilsack (campaign)  
Republican Party  
Convention Â· Primary polls  
General polls Â· Debates Â· Primaries  
Primary results

Nominee: John McCain (campaign Â· positions)  
VP nominee: Sarah Palin (positions)  
Former candidates: Sam Brownback Â· Hugh Cort Â· John Cox Â· Dan Gilbert Â·
Jim Gilmore (campaign) Â· Rudy Giuliani (campaign) Â· Mike Huckabee (campaign)
Â· Duncan Hunter (campaign) Â· Alan Keyes (campaign) Â· Ray McKinney Â· Ron
Paul (campaign) Â· Mitt Romney (campaign) Â· Tom Tancredo (campaign) Â· Fred
Thompson (campaign) Â· Tommy Thompson (campaign)  
Constitution Party  
Convention

Nominee: Chuck Baldwin (campaign)/Darrell Castle  
Former candidates: Daniel Imperato Â· Alan Keyes (campaign)  
Green Party  
Convention

Nominee: Cynthia McKinney (campaign Â· positions)/Rosa Clemente  
Former candidates: Elaine Brown Â· Jesse Johnson Â· Kent Mesplay Â· Kat Swift  
Libertarian Party  
Convention

Nominee: Bob Barr (campaign Â· positions)/Wayne Allyn Root  
Former candidates: Mike Gravel (campaign) Â· Daniel Imperato Â· Steve Kubby Â·
George Phillies Â· Wayne Allyn Root Â· Mary Ruwart Â· Doug Stanhope  
Minor parties

America's Independent Party: Alan Keyes (campaign)/Brian Rohrbough Â· Boston
Tea Party: Charles Jay/Thomas L. Knapp Â· New American Independent Party:
Frank McEnulty Â· Objectivist Party Â· Prohibition Party: Gene Amondson/Leroy
Pletten Â· Party for Socialism and Liberation: Gloria La Riva/Eugene Puryear
Â· Reform Party: Ted Weill/Frank McEnulty Â· Socialist Party: Brian
Moore/Stewart Alexander Â· Socialist Workers Party: RÃ³ger Calero/Alyson
Kennedy  
Independent

Ralph Nader (campaign)/Matt Gonzalez  
Draft movements

Democratic Party: Al Gore Â· Mark Warner (movement) Â· Republican Party: Newt
Gingrich Â· Condoleezza Rice (movement) Â· Independent: Michael Bloomberg
(movement)  
Those listed following the "/" are the party's vice-presidential nominee  
Other 2008 elections: House Â· Senate Â· Gubernatorial  
Persondata  
NAME Gravel, Mike  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES Gravel, Maurice Robert  
SHORT DESCRIPTION U.S. Senator  
DATE OF BIRTH May 13, 1930  
PLACE OF BIRTH Springfield, Massachusetts  
DATE OF DEATH  
PLACE OF DEATH  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mike_Gravel"

Categories: 1930 births | Living people | United States Senators from Alaska |
American democracy activists | French Canadian Americans | American
International College alumni | American political writers | American Unitarian
Universalists | American anti-Iraq War activists | Congressional opponents of
the Vietnam War | Democratic Party (United States) politicians | Direct
democracy activists | Drug policy reform activists | Binational solution
proponents | French Americans | American libertarians | Members of the
Libertarian Party (United States) | Speakers of the Alaska House of
Representatives | United States Army soldiers | United States presidential
candidates, 2008 | United States vice-presidential candidates | Columbia
University alumni | People from Springfield, Massachusetts | People from
Arlington, Virginia | Social Progressives | Former Roman Catholics

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Simple English
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 23:00.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



