
# Katamari Damacy

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Katamari Damacy  
US box art for Katamari Damacy  
  
Developer(s) Namco, NOW Production [1]  
Publisher(s) Namco  
Designer(s) Keita Takahashi  
Aspect ratio 480i (SDTV)  
Platform(s) PlayStation 2  
Release date(s) JP March 18, 2004[2]  
NA September 22, 2004[2]  
  
Genre(s) Third-person puzzle-action  
Mode(s) Single-player, multiplayer  
Rating(s) CERO: All Ages  
KMRB: All Ages  
ESRB: E (Everyone)  
Media DVD (1)  
Input methods DualShock  
Katamari Damacy (å¡é­ ,Katamari Damashii?, lit. "Clump Spirit") is a third-
person puzzle-action video game that is published and developed by Namco for
the PlayStation 2 video game console. It was first released in Japan, and then
later in South Korea and North America. The game resulted from a school
project from the Namco Digital Hollywood Game Laboratory, and was developed
for less than $1 million. In designing Katamari Damacy, the development team
aimed to maintain four key points: novelty, ease of understanding, enjoyment,
and humor.

The game's plot concerns a diminutive prince on a mission to rebuild the
stars, constellations and Moon, which were accidentally destroyed by his
father, the King of All Cosmos. This is achieved by rolling a magical, highly
adhesive ball called a katamari around various locations, collecting
increasingly larger objects, ranging from thumbtacks to people to mountains,
until the ball has grown large enough to become a star. Katamari Damacy's
story, characters, and settings are bizarre and heavily stylized, rarely
attempting any semblance of realism, though the brands and items used are
based on those current in Japan during the game's production.

Overall, Katamari Damacy was well received in Japan and North America. Though
the game sold well, it received mixed comments about its gameplay. The game
was dubbed a sleeper hit, and won several awards. Katamari Damacy inspired the
development of other video games, and led to the release of four sequels in
Japan and other territories: We Love Katamari, Me & My Katamari, Beautiful
Katamari, and I Love Katamari, and to a fifth sequel, Katamari Tribute, to be
released late 2009.

## Contents

  * 1 Story
  * 2 Gameplay
  * 3 Development
    * 3.1 Name
    * 3.2 Soundtrack
  * 4 Reception
  * 5 Sequels
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Story

The primary story in Katamari Damacy deals with the aftereffects of the
planet-sized King of All Cosmos' binge drinking spree that wiped out all the
stars and other celestial bodies from the sky. The King charges his 10-cm-tall
son, the Prince, to go to Earth with a "katamari"âa magical ball that allows
anything smaller than it to stick to it and make it growâand collect enough
material for him to recreate the stars and constellations. The Prince is
successful, and the sky is returned to normal.[3]

A side story follows the Hoshino family as the Prince works at his tasks. The
father, an astronaut, is unable to go to the moon after it is wiped out by the
King, and the daughter 'senses' the Prince's work - she can feel when each
constellation returns to the sky. Ultimately, the family, along with their
house and town, are rolled up in the katamari that is used to remake the
moon.[4]

## [edit] Gameplay

The player controls the Prince as he rolls the katamari around various areas
in order to meet certain parameters set by the King of All Cosmos. The player
uses the two analog sticks on the DualShock controller in a manner similar to
the classic arcade game Battlezone to control the direction the katamari
rolls. Other controls can be triggered by the player to gain a quick burst of
speed, flip the Prince to the other side of the katamari, and more.[3]

Objects that are smaller than the katamari will stick to it when the player
comes into contact with them, while larger objects can be obstacles; colliding
at high speed with a larger object may cause objects to fall off the katamari,
slowing down the player's progress. The game uses both size and weight to
determine if an object will stick to the katamari. This allows long, thin
objects, such as pencils, that are larger than the katamari, to be picked up,
and these will alter how the katamari rolls until more objects are picked
up.[3] Large animals, such as cats, will chase the katamari, knocking things
from it, but once the katamari is large enough, it will scare the animals
away, and they can be rolled up once they are chased down. As objects stick to
the katamari, the katamari will grow, eventually allowing objects that were
once obstacles to be picked up, and creating access to areas that were
previously blocked. In this manner, the player might start the game by picking
up thumbtacks and ants, and slowly work his way up to the point where he is
picking up buildings, mountains and clouds. [3]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The "Make A Star" mode in Katamari Damacy is the primary mode, where the
player must grow the katamari to a specific size in a limited amount of time.

The typical mission given by the King of All Cosmos is the "Make a Star" mode,
where the player needs to grow the katamari to a specific size within a given
amount of time. Other missions have more specific collecting rules, such as
collecting as many girls (interpreted liberally, thus including objects such
as dolls or female animals) within a given time period, or collecting the
largest cow or cow-like object before touching any other similar cow-like
object.[4] The player can attempt a score attack mode for any level, in which
they would try to make the largest katamari possible in the time allotted.
Certain levels can unlock an "eternal mode" by meeting the size requirement
within a shorter amount of time. In eternal modes, the player can explore the
level as much as he likes with no time limit.[5]

Levels feature two secret items that can be found. The first item is a 'royal
present' that contains an object that the Prince can wear. Most gifts are non-
functional, but one includes a camera that can be used to take in-game
screenshots.[5] The other secret item is a cousin of the Prince, which, once
rolled up in main gameplay, can be used as a character in the various
multiplayer modes. The game also tracks which objects the player has collected
at any time, allowing them to review all the various objects within the game.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Multiplayer mode in Katamari Damacy.

In the two-player mode, a player can choose to play as either the Prince or
one of his numerous Cousins. The screen is split vertically; player one is on
the left, and player two is on the right. Players compete simultaneously in a
small arena to collect the most objects within three minutes. The playfield is
replenished with new objects periodically. Players can ram into each other,
knocking items from their opponents' katamaris, and if one player leads by a
fair amount, he can even roll up his opponent and his opponent's katamari.[5]

## [edit] Development

Toru Iwatani, head of research and development for Namco, stated that the idea
for Katamari Damacy resulted from Keita Takahashi's[6] school project from the
Namco Digital Hollywood Game Laboratory, a sponsored institute for game
development education similar to Nintendo sponsored DigiPen.[7] Keita
Takahashi's final thesis bore out the core gameplay ideas, while a team of ten
(including the student) developed the final product. The game was developed
for less than US$1 million, a tenth of the cost of Namco blockbuster titles
such as Ridge Racer or Soulcalibur.[7] The game took a year and a half to
develop, with eight months of prototyping.[8]

Lead developer Keita Takahashi said that the team was aiming for four key
points in developing the game: novelty, ease of understanding, enjoyment, and
humor.[9] Iwatani compared the game to Namco's Pac-Man, which focused on
simplicity and innovation, and served as a template for future games from the
company.[7] At one point during development, Takahashi "proactively ignored"
advice from Namco to increase the complexity of the game.[9]

The game was not originally planned to be The Prince's first appearance;
Takahashi had designed a racing game where the Prince would control a boy
steering a go-cart, running over buildings across the world; the game was
dropped by Namco.[9]

Katamari Damacy was first revealed at the 2003 Tokyo Game Show, at which the
press dubbed it a "snowball simulator".[10] The image featured on the cover of
the pre-release demo showed a "Tamakorogashi", a large ball used in
"undoukai", a game played by Japanese schoolchildren that was an influence for
the game.[8] Plans for releasing the game in Western countries were tied to
its performance in Japan.[11] Katamari Damacy was first shown in the United
States at the Experimental Gameplay Workshop during the March 2004 Game
Developers Conference. Due to its popularity at trade shows and a write-in
campaign, Namco decided to release the game in the United States.[12] Katamari
Damacy was released in Japan at about two-thirds of the cost as a new
title,[13] while the cost was less than half the cost of a new game for its
United States release.

### [edit] Name

In Japanese, Katamari (å¡ ?) means "clump" or "clod" and Damashii is the
rendaku form of tamashii (é­ ?) which means "soul" or "spirit". Therefore,
the phrase approximates to "clump spirit" (in the same sense as "team spirit"
or "school spirit", meaning "enthusiasm"; cf. the use of "damashii" in Yamato-
damashii). The two kanji that form the name look nearly identical (sharing the
same right-side radical) in a kind of visual alliteration. The name is
officially transliterated as Katamari Damacy in most releases. In an interview
with Dengeki Online, producer Keita Takahashi said that when asked about the
title, "It just popped into my head suddenly, and this is what it has been
from the beginning."[14]

### [edit] Soundtrack

Main article: Katamari Fortissimo Damacy

The music in Katamari Damacy was widely hailed as imaginative and original
(winning both IGN's[15] and GameSpot's[16] "Soundtrack of the Year 2004"
awards), and was considered one of the game's best features. The soundtrack
was released in Japan as Katamari Fortissimo Damashii. Its eclectic
composition featured elements of traditional electronic video game music, as
well as heavy jazz and samba influences (Shibuya-kei). Most of the tracks were
composed by Yu Miyake, and many feature vocals from popular J-pop singers,
such as Yui Asaka from the Sukeban Deka 3 TV series, and anime voice actors,
including Nobue Matsubara and Ado Mizumori. One track is sung and written by
Charlie Kosei, composer of the Lupin III soundtrack.

## [edit] Reception

Katamari Damacy enjoyed moderate success in Japan. The game was sold at about
two-thirds of the price of a new game at the time. It was the top selling game
the week of its release with 32,000 units sold.[7] Nearly 156,000 units were
sold in 2004.[13] However, Namco originally estimated that over 500,000 units
would be sold in Japan.[11] Katamari Damacy was one of the recipients of the
2004 Good Design Award in Japan, the first time a video game has won this
award.[17] The game was not released in PAL territories such as Europe and
Australia, since publishers thought it was too "quirky" for these markets;
however, Electronic Arts picked up both sequels, We Love Katamari[18] and Me &
My Katamari,[19] for release in Europe.

The North American release of the game was very well-received by professional
reviewers, was mentioned and praised on TechTV, and was a featured sidebar in
the May 23, 2004 edition of Time magazine. Time continued to praise the game
in its November 22, 2004 "Best games of the year" special, calling it "the
most unusual and original game to hit PlayStation2".[20] Most retailers
underestimated the demand for such a quirky game, and only purchased a few
copies of this sleeper hit; it rapidly sold out nationwide, with sales passing
the 120,000 units mark in North America.[21] It also won the U.S. award for
"Excellence in Game Design" at the 2005 Game Developers Choice Awards,[22] and
G4techTV awarded Katamari Damacy its "Best Innovation" prize in its G-Phoria
of that year.[23]

Although the game has rapidly achieved a cult following and has been praised
by many reviewers, it also has its share of criticism. A common complaint is
that the game is relatively short and repetitiveâit can be completed in
under ten hours, and the gameplay stays virtually the same all the way
through. However, others, such as Electronic Gaming Monthly reviewer Mark
McDonald, argue that the game's limitations are made up for by its strengths:
"Sure, you're basically doing the same thing each mission, but Katamari's
elegant controls, killer soundtrack, and wicked humor make it perfectly suited
for replay."[24] As a well-executed, non-traditional game, Katamari Damacy has
been influential in the game development community. Now, more than three years
after its release, a number of designers have developed works inspired by
Katamari: among them Isostar, The Wonderful End of the World, and Cloud.

## [edit] Sequels

The first sequel to Katamari Damacy, We Love Katamari
(ã¿ããªå¤§å¥½ãå¡é­ ,Minna Daisuki Katamari Damashii?, literally
Everyone Loves Katamari Damacy), was released in Japan on July 5, 2005, North
America on September 20, 2005 (some retailers, such as Target, released it
early) and Europe in February 2006. We Love Katamari is essentially the same
as Katamari Damacy in its gameplay, controls and graphics, but adds several
new options, such as co-operative play and new scoring system in different
levels; monetary value of the objects picked up, the weight of a sumo wrestler
depending on the food he has eaten, etc. The sequel is substantially longer,
and its plot is very self-referentialâit deals with the fans the King of All
Cosmos and his son have attracted since the first Katamari game.

Namco has also brought the Katamari franchise to the PlayStation Portable in
the form of Me & My Katamari (åã®ç§ã®å¡é­ ,Boku no Watashi no Katamari
Damashii?, literally My My Katamari Damacy using the two words in Japanese for
"I" which connote a masculine ('boku') or neutral ('watashi') speaker). This
sequel is set on an island ravaged by a tsunami (brought upon by the Royal
Family's vacation, where they were splashing around in the ocean), and
features a day and night system, as well as different seasons. WindySoft, a
South Korean developer, has announced plans for a Katamari Damacy Online game,
which was due to be released later in 2007, but never made it to the
US.[25][26] Beautiful Katamari was released for the Xbox 360 in October
2007.[27] A PlayStation 3 version was announced but was cancelled shortly
after.[28] Director Jun Morikawa stated, however, that a PS3-version, as well
as a Wii-version, will make it to the consoles soon.[28]

There was also a mobile version released called Katamari Damacy Mobile., which
was actually a sequel to Katamari Damacy-kun,[29][30] which was a 2D side
scrolling mobile version of Katamari, and was later used in the closing credit
mini-game of Me & My Katamari.

In November 2008, Namco released a cellphone version of the game titled
"Rolling With Katamari"[31]

In December 2008, Namco also released an iPhone and iPod Touch sequel called I
Love Katamari, available at the Apple App Store.[32]

In February 2009, the Official Japanese Katamari Website, posted news about an
upcoming Nintendo DSi download game via DSi Ware, based on the Katamari world.
No info as of yet, if this will be available outside of Japan.[33]

In March 2009, Famitsu revealed that a new game, Katamari Tribute would be
coming out to the PS3 later in the year in Japan. The article also mentioned
that this would be the first game in the series to be rendered in full 1080p
HD. [34][35]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Activision/NOW: Little League World Series Baseball 2009". http://elmundotech.wordpress.com/2009/03/10/actv-now-llws-baseball-09/.
  2. ^ a b "Katamari Damacy for PS2". GameSpot. http://www.gamespot.com/ps2/action/katamaridamashii/similar.html?mode=versions. Retrieved on 2008-08-30.
  3. ^ a b c d Sulik, Ivan (2004-09-12). "Katamari Damacy". IGN. http://ps2.ign.com/articles/548/548201p1.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-30.
  4. ^ a b Davis, Ryan (2004-09-20). "Katamari Damacy Review". Gamespot. http://www.gamespot.com/ps2/puzzle/katamaridamashii/review.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-30.
  5. ^ a b c Parish, Jeremy (2004-09-20). "Katamari Damacy (PS2)". 1UP. http://www.1up.com/do/reviewPage?cId=3134713&p=2. Retrieved on 2008-08-30.
  6. ^ http://www.cs.northwestern.edu/~hunicke/blog/content/kdpostmort.htm
  7. ^ a b c d Kent, Steven (2004-04-08). "Katamari Damashii: The Snowball Effect (PS2)". GameSpy. http://ps2.gamespy.com/playstation-2/katamari-damashii/504503p1.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  8. ^ a b Sheffield, Brandon (2005-03-11). "Rolling the Dice: The Risks and Rewards of Developing Katamari Damacy". Gamasutra. http://www.gamasutra.com/gdc2005/features/20050311/postcard-sheffield.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  9. ^ a b c Theobald, Phil (2005-03-10). "Keita Takahashi talks Katamari Damacy". Gamespy. http://www.gamespy.com/articles/595/595110p1.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  10. ^ Gerstmann, Jeff (2003-09-26). "TGS 2003: Katamari Damacy Impressions". Gamespot. http://www.gamespot.com/ps2/action/katamaridamashii/news.html?sid=6075943&mode=all. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  11. ^ a b Gantayat, Anoop (2004-03-09). "Namco Plans Big". IGN. http://ps2.ign.com/articles/497/497400p1.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  12. ^ Durham, Jeremy (2004-07-19). "Katamari Damacy Official in U.S.". IGN. http://ps2.ign.com/articles/531/531682p1.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  13. ^ a b Famitsu. "Famitsu 2004 Top 100". Game Science. Archived from the original on 2006-08-31. http://web.archive.org/web/20060831142645/http://game-science.com/news/000972.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-18.
  14. ^ "é»æãªã³ã©ã¤ã³ãå¡é­ãã¤ã³ã¿ãã¥ã¼" (in Japanese). Dengeki Online. http://www.dengekionline.com/soft/recommend/katamari/. Retrieved on 2006-05-18.
  15. ^ "The Best of 2004: Best Soundtrack". IGN. http://bestof.ign.com/2004/overall/14.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-18.
  16. ^ "Best and Worst of 2004: Winner - Best Original Music". GameSpot. http://www.gamespot.com/gamespot/features/all/bestof2004/day2w_2.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-18.
  17. ^ Smith, David (2004-10-01). "Katamari Damacy Wins Design Award". 1UP.com. http://www.1up.com/do/newsStory?cId=3135113&did=1. Retrieved on 2006-05-18.
  18. ^ Electronic Arts (August 11, 2005-08-11). EA declares: We Love Katamari. Press release. http://ea.gamespress.com/release.asp?i=565. Retrieved on 2006-05-18.
  19. ^ Electronic Arts (2005-11-17). Namco Ltd. announces Me & My Katamari (working title) for PAL territories, EA to co-publish. Press release. http://ea.gamespress.com/release.asp?i=611. Retrieved on 2006-05-18.
  20. ^ Time (2004-11-21). TIME magazine names "The Sims 2" the best video game of the year. Press release. http://www.time.com/time/press_releases/article/0,8599,785333,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-18.
  21. ^ Lowenstein, Doug (May 2005). "State of the Industry Address". Entertainment Software Association. Archived from the original on 2007-04-01. http://web.archive.org/web/20070401230452/http://www.theesa.com/archives/2005/05/e3_2005_state_o_1.php. Retrieved on 2006-05-18.
  22. ^ International Game Developers Association (March 10, 2005). IGDA Names Recipients of the 2005 Game Developers Choice Awards. Press release. http://www.gamechoiceawards.com/pr/pr_2005_0310.htm. Retrieved on 2006-05-18.
  23. ^ Sheffield, Brandon (2005-07-28). "Wrap-Up: G4's G-Phoria Video Game Awards". Gamasutra. http://www.gamasutra.com/php-bin/news_index.php?story=6063. Retrieved on 2006-05-18.
  24. ^ McDonald, Mark (2004-10-25). "Katamari Damacy PS2 Review from Electronic Gaming Monthly". 1UP.com. http://egm.1up.com/do/reviewPage?cId=2019527&did=2. Retrieved on 2006-05-18.
  25. ^ "Katamari Damacy Online Coming (To Korea)". Kotaku. 2007-01-29. http://kotaku.com/gaming/katamari-damacy/katamari-damacy-online-coming-to-korea-232326.php. Retrieved on 2008-08-17.
  26. ^ Klepek, Patrick (2007-01-30). "Katamari Damacy Online, Not As Exciting As You'd Think". 1up.com. http://www.1up.com/do/newsStory?cId=3156800. Retrieved on 2008-08-17.
  27. ^ "Beautiful Katamari on official Namco list for XBox360". http://namco-ch.net/list_game/list.php?hid=27. Retrieved on 2007-07-05.
  28. ^ a b Kennedy, Sam (2007-09-21). "Tokyo Game Show 2007: New Katamari Game Coming to PS3". 1up.com. http://www.1up.com/do/newsStory?cId=3163131. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  29. ^ "å¡é­ãªã³ã¶ã¦ã§ã" (in Japanese). Katamaridamacy.jp. http://katamaridamacy.jp/mobile.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-03.
  30. ^ Kumar, Mathew (2007-04-24). "Katamari Damacy Mobile Announced". GamesOnDeck.com. http://www.gamesondeck.com/news/893/katamari_damacy_mobile_announced.php. Retrieved on 2009-03-03.
  31. ^ "Rolling with Katamari". Namco Games. http://www.namcogames.com/mobile/rolling-with-katamari_4945.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-03.
  32. ^ "i Love Katamari for iPhone/iPod Touch". Namco. http://www.namcogames.com/ipod/i-love-katamari-for-iphone-ipod-touch_5821.html##. Retrieved on 2008-12-23.
  33. ^ "Tenative Title for DSi via DSi Ware or Download Game". Namco. http://katamaridamacy.jp/puzzle/index.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-21.
  34. ^ "PS3: Katamari Damacy In Glorious Full HD". Kotaku. http://kotaku.com/5183056/katamari-damacy-in-glorious-full-hd. Retrieved on 2009-03-25.
  35. ^ Gifford, Ken (2009-03-25). "PS3 Struck By Giant Katamari". 1UP. http://www.1up.com/do/newsStory?cId=3173445. Retrieved on 2009-03-25.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Katamari
Damacy  
Official websites

  * (Japanese) katamaridamacy.jp
  * (English) katamari.namco.com

Other websites

  * Web Katamari, a 2D Flash game by Namco with Katamari Damacy's design, characters and basic premise
  * Katamari Damacy at GameFAQs
  * Katamari Damacy at MobyGames
  * Katamari Damacy reviews at Game Rankings

v â¢ d â¢ e

Katamari Damacy series  
Games

Katamari Damacy â¢ We Love Katamari â¢ Me & My Katamari â¢ Beautiful
Katamari â¢ Katamari Damacy Mobile â¢ I Love Katamari â¢ Korogashi Puzzle
Katamari Damacy â¢ Katamari Forever  
Soundtracks

Katamari Fortissimo Damacy â¢ Katamari wa Damacy â¢ Katamari Original
Soundtrack Damacy â¢ Katamari Suteki Damacy  
Featured article

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katamari_Damacy"

Categories: 2004 video games | Fictional balls | Interactive Achievement Award
winners | Katamari Damacy | PlayStation 2 games | PlayStation 2-only games |
Puzzle video games

Hidden categories: Articles containing Japanese language text | Featured
articles

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 21:55 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



