
# Rahm Emanuel

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Rahm Emanuel  
Rahm Emanuel  
  
* * *
23rd White House Chief of Staff  
Incumbent  
Assumed office  
January 20, 2009  
President Barack Obama  
Preceded by Joshua Bolten  
* * *
U.S. Representative  
from Illinois's 5th district  
In office  
January 3, 2003 â January 2, 2009  
Preceded by Rod Blagojevich  
Succeeded by Mike Quigley  
* * *  
Born November 29, 1959 (1959-11-29) (age 49)  
Chicago, Illinois  
Political party Democratic  
Spouse Amy Rule  
Children (1) son  
(2) daughters  
Alma mater Sarah Lawrence College  
Northwestern University  
Religion Judaism  
Rahm Israel Emanuel[1] (born November 29, 1959) is an American politician
currently serving as White House Chief of Staff to President Barack Obama. He
served previously as Democratic member of the United States House of
Representatives, representing Illinois's 5th congressional district from 2003
until his resignation in 2009 to take up his current position in the Obama
Administration.

Emanuel was chair of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee during
the 2006 mid-term elections and remained a top strategist for House Democrats
during the 2008 cycle. After Democrats regained control of the House in 2006,
Emanuel was elected chairman of the Democratic Caucus. This made him the
fourth-ranking House Democrat, behind Speaker Nancy Pelosi, Majority Leader
Steny Hoyer and Majority Whip Jim Clyburn.[2] Two days after Obama's election
victory, he was announced as Barack Obama's designate for White House Chief of
Staff.[3] Emanuel resigned from the House on January 2, 2009[4] and began his
current job on January 20, 2009, the day of Obama's inauguration.[3]

Emanuel is an influential member of the New Democrat Coalition. He is noted
for his combative style and his political fundraising abilities.[5]

## Contents

  * 1 Early and personal life
  * 2 Career as political staffer
  * 3 Career in finance
  * 4 Congressional career
    * 4.1 Election in 2002
    * 4.2 Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee chairman
    * 4.3 2008 Election
    * 4.4 House leadership
    * 4.5 Political views
    * 4.6 Electoral history
  * 5 White House Chief of Staff
    * 5.1 Reaction to appointment
  * 6 Works
  * 7 References
  * 8 Further reading
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Early and personal life

Emanuel was born in Chicago, Illinois to Jewish parents.[4] His father,
Benjamin M. Emanuel, a Jerusalem-born pediatrician, was a member of the
Irgun.[6][7] His mother, Martha Smulevitz, was the daughter of a Chicago union
organizer.[1] She worked in the civil rights movement and owned, briefly, a
local rock-and-roll club.[6] She is now a psychiatric social worker.[6] The
two met in Chicago in the 1950s.[1] Emanuel's older brother Ezekiel J. Emanuel
is an oncologist and bioethicist, and his brother Ari Emanuel a Hollywood
talent agent.[5] He has an adopted sister, Shoshanna, 14 years his
junior.[5][6]

Emanuel's first name, Rahm (×¨×) means "high" or "lofty" in Hebrew, and is
the namesake of one Rahamim (surname unknown), which means "mercy" in Hebrew,
killed in the 1940s fighting for the Zionist group Lehi.[8][9] The surname
Emanuel (×¢×× ×××), adopted by the family in honor of his father's brother
Emanuel Auerbach, killed in Jerusalem during a skirmish with Arabs, means God
is with us. Sources conflict as to whether the family changed its name from
Auerbach in 1933 or 1938.[6][8][9]

When the family lived in Chicago, Emanuel attended Bernard Zell Anshe Emet Day
School, a Conservative Jewish day school.[10] After his family moved to
Wilmette, he attended public schools: Romona School, Wilmette Junior High
School, and New Trier West High School.[1][11] He and his brothers attended
summer camp in Israel, including just after the 1967 Six Day War.[12][6] At
some point during his high school years, while working at an Arby's
restaurant, Emanuel severely cut his right middle finger. He sought medical
attention only after suffering severe infection as a result of the wound,
resulting in the partial amputation of the finger.[13] Emanuel was encouraged
by his mother to take ballet lessons as a boy and is a graduate of the
Evanston School of Ballet. He won a scholarship to the Joffrey Ballet but
turned it down to attend Sarah Lawrence College, a liberal arts school with a
strong dance program. He graduated from Sarah Lawrence College in 1981, and
went on to receive a master's degree in Speech and Communication from
Northwestern University in 1985. While still an undergraduate, he joined the
congressional campaign of David Robinson of Chicago.[14]

Emanuel's wife, Amy Rule, converted to Judaism shortly before their
wedding.[15] They are members of Anshe Sholom B'nai Israel, a Modern Orthodox
congregation in Chicago.[10] They have a son and two daughters; the older two
attend the same Conservative day school Emanuel himself attended as a
child.[10]

Emanuel is a close friend of fellow Chicagoan David Axelrod, chief strategist
for the 2008 Barack Obama presidential campaign. Axelrod signed the ketuba, a
Jewish marriage contract, at Emanuel's wedding, an honor that goes to a close
friend.[16]

Rabbi Asher Lopatin of Anshe Sholom B'nai Israel Congregation is quoted as
saying: "It's a very involved Jewish family"; "Amy was one of the teachers for
a class for children during the High Holidays two years ago."[10] Emanuel has
said of his Judaism: "I am proud of my heritage and treasure the values it has
taught me."[10] Emanuel's family lives on the North Side of Chicago, in the
North Center neighborhood.[8]

Emanuel trains for and participates in triathlons.[11]

Emanuel is known for his "take-no-prisoners attitude" that has earned him the
nickname "Rahm-bo."[13] Emanuel is said to have "mailed a rotten fish to a
former coworker after the two parted ways."[10] On the night after the 1996
election, "Emanuel was so angry at the president's enemies that he stood up at
a celebratory dinner with colleagues from the campaign, grabbed a steak knife
and began rattling off a list of betrayers, shouting 'Dead! ... Dead! ...
Dead!' and plunging the knife into the table after every name."[5][6] Before
Tony Blair gave a pro-Clinton speech during the impeachment crisis, Emanuel
reportedly screamed to Blair's face "Don't fuck this up!" while Clinton was
present; Blair and Clinton both burst into laughter.[17] However, by 2007 his
close friends were saying that he has "mellowed out."[10] Stories of his
personal style have entered the popular culture, inspiring articles and
websites that chronicle these and other quotes and incidents.[18][19][20][21]
Though executive producer Lawrence O'Donnell has denied it,[22] the character
Josh Lyman in The West Wing is said to be based on Rahm Emanuel.[23][5]

He once said, âRule one: Never allow a crisis to go to waste. They are
opportunities to do big things.â[24]

## [edit] Career as political staffer

Emanuel began his political career with the public interest and consumer
rights organization Illinois Public Action.[25] He went on to serve in a
number of capacities in local and national politics, initially specializing in
fundraising for Illinois campaigns and then nationally.[26]

Emanuel worked for Democrat Paul Simon's 1984 election to the U.S. Senate, was
the national campaign director for the Democratic Congressional Campaign
Committee in 1988, and then was senior advisor and chief fundraiser for
Richard M. Daley's victorious campaign for Mayor of Chicago in 1989.[25]

At the start of then-Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton's presidential primary
campaign, Emanuel was appointed to direct the campaign's finance
committee.[26] Emanuel insisted that Clinton schedule a lot of time for
fundraising and greatly delay campaigning in New Hampshire. Clinton agreed and
embarked on an aggressive fundraising campaign across the nation. The
fundraising paid off later, providing the campaign a vital buffer to keep
buying television time as attacks on Clinton's character threatened to swamp
the campaign during the New Hampshire primary.[10]

Clinton's most serious primary rival, Paul Tsongas (the New Hampshire
Democratic primary winner in 1992), later withdrew, citing a lack of campaign
funds. Richard Mintz, a Washington public relations consultant who worked with
Emanuel on the campaign, spoke about the soundness of the idea: "It was that
[extra] million dollars that really allowed the campaign to withstand the
storm we had to ride out in New Hampshire [over Clinton's relationship with
Gennifer Flowers and the controversy over his draft status during the Vietnam
War."[10] Emanuel's knowledge of the top donors in the country, and his
rapport with potential donors within the Jewish community helped Clinton amass
a then-unheard-of sum of $72 million.[10]

Following the campaign, Emanuel became a senior advisor to Clinton at the
White House from 1993 to 1998. In the White House, Emanuel was initially
Assistant to the President for Political Affairs and then Senior Advisor to
the President for Policy and Strategy. He was a leading strategist in the
unsuccessful White House efforts to institute universal healthcare and many
other Clinton initiatives.[27]

One of his proudest moments during the Clinton administration "was an event
that touched his political sensibilities and his personal ties to Israel: the
1993 Rose Garden signing ceremony after the Oslo Accords between Israel and
the Palestine Liberation Organization ("PLO"). Emanuel directed the details of
the ceremony, down to the choreography of the famous handshake between Israeli
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and PLO leader Yasser Arafat."[10]

## [edit] Career in finance

After serving as an advisor to Bill Clinton, in 1998 Emanuel resigned from his
position in the Clinton administration and became an investment banker at
Wasserstein Perella (now Dresdner Kleinwort), where he worked until 2002.[28]
In 1999, he became a managing director at the firmâs Chicago office. Emanuel
made $16.2 million in his two-and-a-half-year stint as a banker, according to
Congressional disclosures.[28][29] At Wasserstein Perella, he worked on eight
deals, including the acquisition by Commonwealth Edison of Peco Energy and the
purchase by GTCR Golder Rauner of the SecurityLink home security unit from SBC
Communications.[28]

Emanuel was named to the Board of Directors for the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation ("Freddie Mac") by then President Bill Clinton in 2000. His
position earned him at least $320,000, including later stock sales.[30][31] He
was not assigned to any of the board's working committees, and the Board met
no more than six times per year.[31]

During his time on the board, Freddie Mac was plagued with scandals involving
campaign contributions and accounting irregularities.[32][31] The Obama
Administration rejected a request under the Freedom of Information Act to
review Freddie Mac board minutes and correspondence during Emanuel's time as a
director.[31]

The Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO) later accused the
board of having "failed in its duty to follow up on matters brought to its
attention." Emanuel resigned from the board in 2001 when he ran for
Congress.[33]

## [edit] Congressional career

### [edit] Election in 2002

<IMG>

<IMG>

Rep. John Dingell and Rep. Emanuel sharing pÄ czki in 2006.

After working in investment banking, in 2002 Emanuel pursued the U.S. House
seat in the 5th District of Illinois previously held by Rod Blagojevich, who
chose not to run for re-election, but instead successfully ran for Governor of
Illinois.

His strongest opponent of the seven other candidates in the 2002 Democratic
primary â the real contest in this heavily Democratic district â was
former Illinois State Representative Nancy Kaszak, who had unsuccessfully
opposed Blagojevich in the 1996 primary. The most controversial moment of the
primary election came when Edward Moskal, president of the Polish American
Congress, a political action committee endorsing Kaszak, called Emanuel a
"millionaire carpetbagger who knows nothing" about "our heritage". Moskal also
charged that Emanuel had dual citizenship with Israel and had served in the
Israeli Army.[34] Emanuel did not serve in the Israeli army, but was a
civilian volunteer assisting the Israel Defense Forces for a short time during
the 1991 Gulf War, repairing truck brakes in one of Israel's northern bases
with Sar-El.[35][36] Emanuel brought together a coalition of Chicago clergy to
denounce the incident. He recalled, "One of the proudest moments of my life
was seeing people of my district from all backgrounds demonstrate our common
values by coming together in response to this obvious attempt to divide
them."[10] Moskal's comments were denounced as anti-Semitic by Kaszak.[34]

Emanuel won the primary and easily defeated Republican candidate Mark Augusti
in the general election.

Emanuel was elected after the October 2002 joint Congressional resolution
authorizing the Iraq War, and thus was not able to vote on it, however Emanuel
has been the focus of anti-war protests for his support of funding bills for
the war in Iraq, and his support, during Democratic party primaries, of
Democratic party candidates that are more hawkish. In his first term, Rahm
Emanuel was a founding member and the Co-Chair of the Congressional Serbian
Caucus.[37]

In January, 2003 he was named to the Financial Services Committee, and sat on
the subcommittee that oversaw Freddie Mac. A few months later, Freddie Mac
Chief Executive Officer Leland Brendsel was forced out, and the committee and
subcommittee commenced hearings lasting for more than a year. Emanuel skipped
every hearing allegedly for reasons of avoiding any appearance of favoritism,
impropriety, or conflict of interest.[38]

In 2006, Chicago Tribune columnist John Kass reported he had a newsroom
confrontation with Emanuel over Kassâs continued speculation that Emanuel
only won his 2002 election because convicted former Chicago water department
boss Don Tomczak sent in his employees to work for Emanuel. He also speculated
that Mayor Richard Daleyâs âunderlingsâ who were sentenced to federal
prison for organizing âpatronage armiesâ also helped Emanuel.[32]

### [edit] Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee chairman

The position of Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee chairman (DCCC)
was assumed by Emanuel after the death of the previous chair, Bob Matsui.
Emanuel led the Democratic Party's effort to capture the majority in the House
of Representatives in the 2006 elections. After Emanuel's election as chairman
of the Democratic Caucus, Chris Van Hollen became committee chair for the
110th Congress.

While he was chairman of the DCCC, Emanuel was known to have had disagreements
over Democratic election strategy with Democratic National Committee Chairman
Howard Dean. Dean favored a "50 state strategy", building support for the
Democratic Party over the long term, while Emanuel believed a more tactical
approach, focusing attention on key districts, was necessary to ensure
victory.[39]

Ultimately the Democratic Party enjoyed considerable success in the 2006
elections, gaining 30 seats in the House. Emanuel has received considerable
praise for his stewardship of the DCCC during this election cycle, even from
Illinois Republican Rep. Ray LaHood who said "He legitimately can be called
the golden boy of the Democratic Party today. He recruited the right
candidates, found the money and funded them, and provided issues for them.
Rahm did what no one else could do in seven cycles."[40]

### [edit] 2008 Election

<IMG>

<IMG>

Emanuel speaks during the second day of the 2008 Democratic National
Convention in Denver, Colorado.

Emanuel declared in April 2006 that he would support Hillary Rodham Clinton
should she pursue the presidency in 2008. Emanuel remained close to Bill
Clinton since leaving the White House, talking strategy with him at least once
a month as chairman of the DCCC.[11] However, Emanuel's loyalties came into
conflict when his home-state senator Barack Obama expressed interest in the
race; asked in January 2007 about his stance on the Democratic presidential
nomination, he said: "I'm hiding under the desk. I'm very far under the desk,
and I'm bringing my paper and my phone."[41] Emanuel remained neutral in the
race until June 4, 2008, the day after the final primary contests, when he
endorsed the eventual winner Obama.[42]

Emanuel easily won re-election to the House, defeating Republican candidate
Tom Hanson. Open Secrets reported that Emanuel "was the top House recipient in
the 2008 election cycle of contributions from hedge funds, private equity
firms and the larger securities/investment industry".[43]

### [edit] House leadership

After his role in helping the Democrats to win the 2006 elections, Emanuel was
believed to be a leading candidate for the position of Majority Whip. Nancy
Pelosi, who became the next Speaker of the House, persuaded him not to
challenge Jim Clyburn, but instead to succeed Clyburn in the role of
Democratic Caucus Chairman. In return, Pelosi agreed to assign the caucus
chair more responsibilities, including "aspects of strategy and messaging,
incumbent retention, policy development and rapid-response communications."
Caucus vice-chair John Larson remained in this role instead of running for the
chairman position.[44]

After U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney asserted that he did not fall within the
bounds of orders set for the executive branch, Emanuel called for cutting off
the $4.8 million the Executive Branch provides for the Vice President's
office.[45]

### [edit] Political views

During his original 2002 campaign, Emanuel "indicated his support of President
Bush's position on Iraq, but said he believed the president needed to better
articulate his position to the American people".[10] One of the major goals he
spoke of during the race was "to help make health care affordable and
available for all Americans".[10]

Emanuel frustrated Chicago peace activists who lobbied his office to reverse
course on the Iraq war.[46] In the 2006 congressional primaries, Emanuel, then
head of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, made national
headlines for engineering a run by Tammy Duckworth â an Iraq war veteran
with no political experience â against grassroots candidate Christine
Cegelis in Illinois' 6th District. Expedited withdrawal from Iraq was a
central point of Cegelis's campaign; Duckworth opposed a withdrawal
timetable.[47]

In his 2006 book, co-authored with Bruce Reed, The Plan: Big Ideas for
America,[48] Emanuel advocated a three-month compulsory universal service
program for Americans between the ages of 18 and 25.[49] An expanded version
of this idea was later proposed by U.S. Presidential candidate Barack Obama
(who was later to choose Emanuel as his White House Chief of Staff), during
his 2008 campaign, in a speech on July 2, 2008 at the University of Colorado,
in which Obama proposed a "civilian national security force" (this term being
used in the spoken version of his speech, not in the original written
version), which included expanded voluntary national service programs in many
areas, such as infrastructure rebuilding, service to the elderly, and
environmental cleanup. For some of these services, tax credits and direct pay,
primarily for college tuition, was proposed. Obama's original proposal was for
participation by all ages, but with required participation by all middle
school and high school students for 50 hours of community service a year. That
proposed requirement was later modified to being "a goal".[50] Obama's entire
service program proposal quickly became controversial, largely for being
mistaken as a call for a national paramilitary force, though the proposal's
only reference to military service was to volunteer participation in regular
U.S. Armed Forces, as one activity that would qualify for inclusion under the
program's umbrella.

Emanuel is generally liberal on social issues. He maintained a 100 percent
pro-choice voting record and is a strong supporter of gun control, rated "F"
by the NRA in December 2003.[51] He has also strongly supported the banning of
numerous rifles based upon "sporting" purposes criteria.[52] He has aligned
himself with the centrist wing of the Democratic Party, the Democratic
Leadership Council.[53][54]

In June 2007, Emanuel condemned an outbreak of Palestinian violence in the
Gaza Strip and criticized Arab countries for not applying the same kind of
pressure on the Palestinians as they have on Israel. At a 2003 pro-Israel
rally in Chicago, Emanuel told the marchers Israel was ready for peace but
would not get there until Palestinians "turn away from the path of
terror".[55]

Emanuel has been called an ally of former Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich
and Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley; other sources dispute that he has been an
ally of Blagojevich, for whom Emanuel served as a campaign adviser.[56][57] He
called Illinois state legislator John C. D'Amico in 2008 in support of
Blagojevich's Illinois capital bill, but withdrew his encouragement when he
discovered Daley opposed the bill.[56]After Obama's election victory, Emanuel
articulated his view on the role of government as a positive force to face
difficult challenges and solve national problems, notably combating global
warming through green energy policies and completely restructuring the
healthcare system.[58]

  

### [edit] Electoral history

U.S. House, 5th District of Illinois (General Election)  
Year Winning candidate Party Pct Opponent Party Pct Opponent Party Pct  
2002 Rahm Emanuel Democratic 67% Mark Augusti Republican 29% Frank Gonzalez
Libertarian 4%  
2004 Rahm Emanuel (inc.) Democratic 76% Bruce Best Republican 24%  
2006 Rahm Emanuel (inc.) Democratic 78% Kevin White Republican 22%  
2008 Rahm Emanuel (inc.) Democratic 74% Tom Hanson Republican 22%  
## [edit] White House Chief of Staff

See also: Illinois's 5th congressional district special election, 2009

<IMG>

<IMG>

Barack Obama and Rahm Emanuel in the Oval Office

On November 6, 2008, Emanuel accepted the Cabinet-level[59] position of White
House Chief of Staff for Barack Obama.[3] He resigned his congressional seat
effective January 2, 2009. [60] A special primary to fill his vacated
congressional seat was held on March 3, 2009, and the special general election
on April 7.[61][62] Chicago newspapers reported that one candidate for that
seat said at a forum that Emanuel had told him he may be interested in running
for the seat again in the future.[63]

### [edit] Reaction to appointment

Some Republican leaders criticized Emanuel's appointment because they believed
it went against Obama's promises to make politics less divisive, given
Emanuel's reputation as a partisan Democrat.[3] Republican Lindsey Graham
disagreed, saying: "This is a wise choice by President-elect Obama. He's tough
but fair â honest, direct and candid."[64]

Ira Forman, executive director of the National Jewish Democratic Council, said
that the choice indicates that Obama will not listen to the wrong people
regarding the U.S.âIsrael relationship.[55] Some commentators opined that
Emanuel would be good for the IsraeliâPalestinian peace process because if
Israeli leaders make excuses for not dismantling settlements, Emanuel will be
tough and pressure the Israelis to comply.[65][66]

Some Palestinians and Arabs have expressed dismay at Obamaâs appointment of
Emanuel.[67] Ali Abunimah of the Electronic Intifada said that Obamaâs
appointment of Emanuel sent the signal he would not be taking âmore
balanced, more objective, more realistic advice that could change the course
from the disastrous Palestine-Israel policies of the Bush and Clinton
administrations.â[68] Emanuel said that Obama did not need his influence to
"orientate his policy toward Israel".[69]

## [edit] Works

  * Rahm Emanuel and Bruce Reed, The Plan: Big Ideas for America, PublicAffairs Books of Perseus Books Group, August 2006, ISBN 1586484125. Information from publisher.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d Hendrix, Steve (2006-10-22). "Fighting for The Spoils". The Washington Post: p. D1. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/21/AR2006102101049_pf.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-18.
  2. ^ Baker, Peter and Zeleny, Jeff (2008-11-06). "For Obama, No Time to Bask in Victory As He Starts to Build a Transition Team". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/11/06/us/politics/06elect.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-17.
  3. ^ a b c d O'Connor, Patrick and Mike Allen (2008-11-06). "Exclusive: Emanuel accepts White House job". politico.com. http://www.politico.com/news/stories/1108/15371.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-17.
  4. ^ a b "Emanuel, Rahm". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. United States Congress. http://bioguide.congress.gov/scripts/biodisplay.pl?index=e000287.
  5. ^ a b c d e Green, Joshua (2005-10-20). "The Enforcer". Rolling Stone. http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/story/8091986/the_enforcer/. Retrieved on 208-12-17.
  6. ^ a b c d e f g Bumiller, Elisabeth (1997-06-15). "The Brothers Emanuel". New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9804E4D61631F936A25755C0A961958260&scp=3&sq=%22brothers%20emanuel%22&st=cse. Retrieved on 2008-12-17.
  7. ^ "Profile: Rahm Emanuel". BBC News. 7 November 2008. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/7702408.stm.
  8. ^ a b c Kuttler, Hillel (July 1, 1997). "The view from the top". Jerusalem Post. http://pqasb.pqarchiver.com/jpost/access/64159319.html?dids=64159319:64159319&FMT=ABS&FMTS=ABS:FT&date=Jul+1%2C+1997&author=Hillel+Kuttler&pub=Jerusalem+Post&edition=&startpage=07&desc=The+view+from+the+top.
  9. ^ a b Pfeffer, Anshel and Shlomo Shamir (November 6, 2006). "Obama's first pick: Israeli Rahm Emanuel as chief of staff". Haaretz. http://www.haaretz.com/hasen/spages/1034855.html. Retrieved on November 6 2008.
  10. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Kintisch, Eli. "Newest Jewish U.S. Representative Makes Instant Impact". JTA. http://www.ujc.org/content_display.html?ArticleID=68298. Retrieved on June 2, 2007.
  11. ^ a b c Easton, Nina (October 2, 2006). "Rahm Emanuel: Rejuvenating the hopes of House Democrats". Fortune Magazine. http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/2006/10/02/8387515/index.htm. Retrieved on November 6, 2008.
  12. ^ Kampeas, Ron (November 9, 2008). "Rahm Emanuel: attack dog, policy wonk, committed Jew". JTA. http://jta.org/news/article/2008/11/09/1000859/rahm-emanuel-attack-dog-policy-wonk-committed-jew.
  13. ^ a b Stephey, M.J.; Kate Pickert (November 6, 2008). "2-min. Bio; Rahm Emanuel". TIME. http://www.time.com/time/politics/article/0,8599,1856965,00.html. Retrieved on November 20, 2008.
  14. ^ "Rahm Emanuel, Obamaâs pick for Chief of Staff, is tough, direct and wedded to his Jewish roots". Jewish Journal (Los Angeles). November 6, 2008. http://www.jewishjournal.com/united_states/article/rahm_emanuel_obamas_pick_for_chief_of_staff_is_tough_direct_and_wedded_to_h/. Retrieved on November 6, 2008.
  15. ^ Azoulay, Orly (November 2, 2008). "Obama's Israeli adviser: Next White House chief of staff?". Ynet. http://www.ynetnews.com/articles/0,7340,L-3616306,00.html.
  16. ^ Smalley, Suzanne; Evan Thomas (April 14, 2008). "Come, O Come, Emanuel". Newsweek. http://www.newsweek.com/id/130605.
  17. ^ Coughlin, Con (2006). American Ally: Tony Blair and the War on Terror. HarperCollins.
  18. ^ Cilizza, Chris (November 6, 2008). "Ten Facts You Need to Know About Rahm Emanuel". The Washington Post. http://voices.washingtonpost.com/thefix/2008/11/top_10_facts_you_need_to_know.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-02.
  19. ^ "Rahm Emanuel Facts". rahmfacts.com. http://rahmfacts.com. Retrieved on 2008-12-02.
  20. ^ "Rahmblr". http://rahmblr.tumblr.com/. Retrieved on 2008-12-02.
  21. ^ Schroeder, Anne (2008-11-12). "Because really there's never too much Rahm anything". Shenanigans. Politico. http://www.politico.com/blogs/anneschroeder/1108/Because_really_theres_never_too_much_Rahm_anything_.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-02.
  22. ^ "Politically Direct". David Bender, Host. Lawrence O'Donnell, Guest.. Politically Direct with David Bender. Air America Radio. 2008-11-09. 14:17 minutes in.
  23. ^ MacAskill, Ewen (November 7, 2008). "Economic rescue plan main priority as new chief of staff named". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2008/nov/07/rahm-emmanuel-obama-white-house-economy. Retrieved on November 7, 2008. "Like the president-elect, Emanuel is a Chicago native with a strong connection to the city's political elite. Both have inspired characters on the television series The West Wing, with Emanuel providing the model for deputy Chief-of-Staff Josh Lyman."
  24. ^ http://www.nytimes.com/2008/11/10/us/politics/10obama.html?ref=politics
  25. ^ a b "About Rahm". Congressman Rahm Emanuel. United States House of Representatives. 2007. http://www.house.gov/emanuel/aboutrahm.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-12-09.
  26. ^ a b "Rahm Emanuel". Jewish Virtual Library. 2008. http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/biography/emanuel.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-09.
  27. ^ "Profile:Rahm Emanuel â Former ballet dancer turned political fixer". The Guardian: p. 18\. November 10, 2006. http://www.guardian.co.uk/international/story/0,,1944305,00.html. Retrieved on November 11 2006.
  28. ^ a b c Sanati, Cyrus; Andrew Ross Sorkin (November 7, 2008). "Rahm Emanuel, Former Investment Banker". New York Times. http://dealbook.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/11/07/rahm-emanuel-former-investment-banker. Retrieved on November 8, 2008.
  29. ^ Easton, Nina (September 25, 2006). "Rahm Emanuel, Pitbull politician". Fortune. http://money.cnn.com/2006/09/17/magazines/fortune/politics.fortune/index.htm.
  30. ^ Poor, Jeff (November 6, 2008). "Obama's Chief of Staff Pick a Freddie Mac Alum". Business & Media Institute. http://www.businessandmedia.org/articles/2008/20081106133228.aspx. Retrieved on November 8, 2008.
  31. ^ a b c d http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/politics/obama/chi-rahm-emanuel-profit-26-mar26,0,5682373.story
  32. ^ a b Sweet, Lynn (January 3, 2002). "Too much money a bad thing? 5th District House candidate Rahm Emanuel tested voter reaction to $6 million salary". The Chicago Sun-Times. http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P2-1426034.html.
  33. ^ Ross, Brian; Rhonda Schwartz (November 7, 2008). "Emanuel Was Director Of Freddie Mac During Scandal". ABC News. http://www.abcnews.go.com/Blotter/story?id=6201900&page=1. Retrieved on November 7, 2008.
  34. ^ a b Wilgoren, Jodi (March 6, 2002). "Ethnic Comments Rattle Race for Congress". New York Times.
  35. ^ Sweet, Lynn (November 7, 2008). "Rahm Emanuel, enforcer". Chicago Sun-Times. http://blogs.suntimes.com/sweet/2008/11/rahm_emanuel_enforcer.html. Retrieved on November 11, 2008.
  36. ^ Simon, Roger (February 3, 1997). "The man who would be George: Rahm Emanuel, centrist of the universe". The New Republic (paid access) 216 (5): 17. http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-19054588.html.
  37. ^ U.S. House of Representatives (September 28, 2004). Emanuel to Co-Chair Congressional Serbian Caucus. Press release. http://www.house.gov/apps/list/press/il05_emanuel/serbian_caucus.html.
  38. ^ http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/politics/obama/chi-rahm-emanuel-profit-26-mar26,0,5682373.story?page=2
  39. ^ Allen, Mike and Perry Bacon, Jr. (June 4, 2006). "Whose Party Is It Anyway?". Time. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/printout/0,8816,1200740,00.html.
  40. ^ Haygood, Wil (November 9, 2006). "Democratic 'Golden Boy' Rahm Emanuel, Basking In the Glow of Victory". Washington Post: p. C05. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/11/08/AR2006110802239.html. Retrieved on January 3 2007.
  41. ^ Dorning, Mike (January 19, 2007). "Rahm Emanuel's Great Loyalty Test". Chicago Tribune. http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/nationworld/chi-0701190131jan19,1,2183324.story?coll=chi-newsnationworld-hed. Retrieved on January 21 2007.
  42. ^ Murray, Shailagh (2008-06-04). "Emanuel Endorses Obama". Washington Post. http://voices.washingtonpost.com/the-trail/2008/06/04/emanuel_to_endorse_obama.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.
  43. ^ Mayer, Lindsay Renick (November 5, 2008). "Obama's Pick for Chief of Staff Tops Recipients of Wall Street Money". Open Secrets. http://www.opensecrets.org/news/2008/11/obamas-pick-for-chief-of-staff.html. Retrieved on November 6, 2008.
  44. ^ Babington, Charles and Jonathan Weisman (November 10, 2006). "Reid, Pelosi Expected to Keep Tight Rein in Both Chambers". Washington Post: p. A12. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/11/09/AR2006110901764.html.
  45. ^ Allen, Mike (June 27, 2007). "Dems force Cheney to flip-flop on secret doc". Politico.com. http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0607/4679.html.
  46. ^ Barreto, Sergio (November 7, 2008). "Rahmbo vs. the Chicago Peace Movement, Chicago activists won't miss him". Chicago FreeSpeechZone. http://chicagofreespeechzone.blogspot.com/2008/11/rahmbo-vs-chicago-peace-movement.html.
  47. ^ Renner, Matt (September 6, 2007). "Democratic House Officials Recruited Wealthy Conservatives". truthout.org. http://www.truthout.org/article/special-report-democratic-house-officials-recruited-wealthy-conservatives.
  48. ^ Emanuel, Rahm and Bruce Reed (2006). The Plan: Big Ideas for Change in America. PublicAffairs Books. http://www.readtheplan.com/.
  49. ^ Tuccille, J.D. (November 6, 2008). "Obama's chief of staff choice favors compulsory universal service". Civil Liberties Examiner (Houston). http://www.examiner.com/x-536-Civil-Liberties-Examiner~y2008m11d6-Obamas-chief-of-staff-choice-favors-compulsory-universal-service.
  50. ^ "Service". BarackObama.com. http://www.barackobama.com/issues/service/.
  51. ^ Rahm Emanuel on the Issues, On the Issues, November 14, 2008
  52. ^ "Online Focus: Taking Aim". The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer. April 6, 1998. http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/law/jan-june98/guns_4-6.html.
  53. ^ Nichols, John (November 5, 2008). "Rahm Emanuel: Face of Change?". The Nation. http://www.thenation.com/doc/20081117/nichols2?rel=rightsideaccordian. Retrieved on February 2, 2009.
  54. ^ Democratic Leadership Council (November 6, 2008). Congressman Rahm Emanuel Named Chief of Staff to President-elect Obama. Press release. http://www.dlcppi.org/ndol_ci.cfm?kaid=85&subid=108&contentid=254822. Retrieved on February 2, 2009.
  55. ^ a b Ninan, Reena and Judson Berger. "With Emanuel, Obama Could Be Sending Signal to Israel". Fox News. http://elections.foxnews.com/2008/11/05/emanuel-obama-sends-signal-israel/. Retrieved on November 6, 2008.
  56. ^ a b Miller, Rich (August 8, 2008). "Once again, Blagojevich proves why he can't be trusted". Chicago Sun-Times. http://www.weareillinois.org/connect/newsDetail.aspx?newsID=4433. Retrieved on November 9, 2008.
  57. ^ Blackledge, Brett J.; Tammy Webber (2008-12-20). "Senate-for-sale case threatens new chief of staff". Associated Press. http://www.google.com/hostednews/ap/article/ALeqM5jcpoVP8qq-eXJi9T0imPYab5NRUQD956KT600. Retrieved on 2008-12-20.
  58. ^ Weisman, Jonathan; Davis, Susan (2008-11-19). "Emanuel sets a challenge". Wall Street Journal. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB122706319966040053.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-26.
  59. ^ WhiteHouse.Gov Cabinet page.
  60. ^ Merrion, Paul (December 29, 2008). "Emanuel resigns seat effective Friday". ChicagoBusiness.com. http://www.chicagobusiness.com/cgi-bin/news.pl?id=32418. Retrieved on 2009-02-09.
  61. ^ "Emanuel's departure will trigger special election". Chicago Tribune. Associated Press. November 6, 2008. http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/wire/chi-ap-il-emanuel-openseat,0,7401450.story. Retrieved on 2009-02-09.
  62. ^ Mihalopoulos, Dan (2009-01-20). "26 file for congressional seat vacated by Rahm Emanuel". Chicago Tribune. http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/chi-congress-20-jan20,0,6500724.story. Retrieved on 2009-02-09.
  63. ^ John McCormick and Dan Mihalopoulos, Candidate says Emanuel might want to reclaim House seat someday, Chicago Tribune, February 1, 2009.
  64. ^ Talev, Margaret; Steven Thomma (November 7, 2008). "Obama names chief of staff, plans news conference as transition pace picks up". McClatchy Newspapers. http://www.kansascity.com/news/politics/story/879220.html.
  65. ^ Goldberg, Jeffrey (November 6, 2008). "Rahm Emanuel and Israel". The Atlantic. http://jeffreygoldberg.theatlantic.com/archives/2008/11/rahm_emanuel_and_israel.php.
  66. ^ Kenner, David (November 7, 2008). "Rahm Emanuel and Israel". Foreign Policy. http://blog.foreignpolicy.com/node/10246.
  67. ^ Kalman, Matthew (November 6, 2008). "Obama chief of staff Rahm Emanuel is no pal of ours, Israel's foes say". New York Daily News. http://www.nydailynews.com/news/politics/2008/11/06/2008-11-06_obama_chief_of_staff_rahm_emanuel_is_no_.html.
  68. ^ "President-Elect Obama and the Future of US Foreign Policy: A Roundtable Discussion". Democracy Now. November 06, 2008. http://i3.democracynow.org/2008/11/6/president_elect_obama_and_the_future.
  69. ^ "Top Obama aide apologizes for father's remarks". Reuters. November 13, 2008. http://www.reuters.com/article/politicsNews/idUSTRE4AC99K20081113.

## [edit] Further reading

Biography

  * Bendavid, Naftali The Thumpin': How Rahm Emanuel and the Democrats Learned to Be Ruthless and Ended the Republican Revolution, Doubleday (May 8, 2007), ISBN 978-0385523288

Articles

  * Hendrix, Steve Fighting for The Spoils The Washington Post, October 22, 2006
  * Profile: Rahm Emanuel The Guardian, November 10, 2006
  * Bendavid, Naftali The House that Rahm Built Chicago Tribune, November 12, 2006
  * Democratic Caucus Chair Rahm Emanuel NPR Fresh Air from WHYY, January 11, 2007, 20-minute interview
  * The five most infamous Rahm Emanuel moments Foreign Policy, November 6, 2008
  * Ron Kampeas, Rahm Emanuel: attack dog, policy wonk, committed Jew Jewish Telegraphic Agency, November 9, 2008

Video

  * Representative Rahm Emanuel speaks at The Brookings Institution on Fora.tv
  * Rahm Emanuel conversations with Charlie Rose

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Rahm Emanuel  
  * Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel official White House page
  * Friends of Rahm Emanuel official campaign website

  * Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
  * Voting record maintained by The Washington Post
  * Campaign finance reports and data at the Federal Election Commission
  * Campaign contributions at OpenSecrets.org
  * Biography, voting record, and interest group ratings at Project Vote Smart
  * Issue positions and quotes at On The Issues
  * Current Bills Sponsored at StateSurge.com
  * Profile at SourceWatch Congresspedia
  * Profile: Rahm Emanuel from BBC News
  * Rahm Emanuel profile at Washington Post's "WhoRunsGov.com" site
  * Collected news and commentary at The New York Times
  * Rahm Emanuel at the Jewish Virtual Library
  * Rahm Emanuel at the Open Directory Project

United States House of Representatives  
Preceded by  
Rod Blagojevich Member of the U.S. House of Representatives  
from Illinois's 5th congressional district  
2003 â 2009 Succeeded by  
TBD  
Party political offices  
Preceded by  
Robert Matsui Chairman of Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee  
2005 â 2007 Succeeded by  
Chris Van Hollen  
Preceded by  
Jim Clyburn Chairman of House Democratic Caucus  
2006 â 2009 Succeeded by  
John Larson  
Political offices  
Preceded by  
Joshua Bolten White House Chief of Staff  
Served Under: Barack Obama  
2009 â present Incumbent  
v â¢ d â¢ e

White House Chiefs of Staff  
John R. Steelman â¢ Sherman Adams â¢ Wilton Persons â¢ W. Marvin Watson â¢
H. R. Haldeman â¢ Alexander Haig â¢ Donald Rumsfeld â¢ Dick Cheney â¢
Hamilton Jordan â¢ Jack Watson â¢ James Baker â¢ Donald Regan â¢ Howard
Baker â¢ Kenneth Duberstein â¢ John H. Sununu â¢ Samuel K. Skinner â¢
James Baker â¢ Mack McLarty â¢ Leon Panetta â¢ Erskine Bowles â¢ John
Podesta â¢ Andrew Card â¢ Joshua Bolten â¢ Rahm Emanuel

White House Logo  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Current members of the United States Cabinet  
Bidenc Â· Chu Â· Clinton Â· Donovan Â· Duncan Â· Emanuelc Â· Gates Â· Geithner
Â· Holder Â· Jacksonc Â· Johnsona Â· Kirkc Â· LaHood Â· Locke Â· Napolitano Â·
Obamac Â· Orszagc Â· Ricec Â· Romerc Â· Salazar Â· Solis Â· Shinseki Â·
Vilsack

<IMG>  
a \- acting; c \- cabinet-level  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Cabinet of President Barack Obama (2009 â present)  
Cabinet  
Secretary of State

Hillary Rodham Clinton (2009 â present)

Barack Obama, forty-fourth President of the United States  
Secretary of the Treasury

Timothy Geithner (2009 â present)  
Secretary of Defense

Robert Gates (2009 â present)  
Attorney General

Eric Holder (2009 â present)  
Secretary of the Interior

Ken Salazar (2009 â present)  
Secretary of Agriculture

Tom Vilsack (2009 â present)  
Secretary of Commerce

Gary Locke (2009 â present)  
Secretary of Labor

Hilda Solis (2009 â present)  
Secretary of Health and Human Services

Vacant  
Secretary of Education

Arne Duncan (2009 â present)  
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development

Shaun Donovan (2009 â present)  
Secretary of Transportation

Ray LaHood (2009 â present)  
Secretary of Energy

Steven Chu (2009 â present)  
Secretary of Veterans Affairs

Eric Shinseki (2009 â present)  
Secretary of Homeland Security

Janet Napolitano (2009 â present)  
Cabinet-level  
Vice President

Joe Biden (2009 â present)

<IMG>  
White House Chief of Staff

Rahm Emanuel (2009 â present)  
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency

Lisa Jackson (2009 â present)  
Director of the Office of Management and Budget

Peter Orszag (2009 â present)  
Trade Representative

Ron Kirk (2009 â present)  
Ambassador to the United Nations

Susan Rice (2009 â present)  
Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers

Christina Romer (2009 â present)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Members of the U.S. House of Representatives from Illinois  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Districts created on or before 1863  
1st district

Slade Â· Reynolds Â· Snyder Â· Reynolds Â· Smith Â· Bissell Â· Washburne Â·
Arnold Â· Wentworth Â· Judd Â· Farwell Â· Rice Â· Caulfield Â· Aldrich Â·
Dunham Â· Taylor Â· Aldrich Â· Mann Â· Emerich Â· Madden Â· De Priest Â·
Mitchell Â· Dawson Â· Metcalfe Â· Stewart Â· Washington Â· Hayes Â· Rush

Seal of the United States House  
Flag of Illinois  
2nd district

Casey Â· McClernand Â· Allen, Willis Â· Wentworth Â· Woodworth Â· Farnsworth
Â· Arnold Â· Farnsworth Â· Ward Â· Harrison Â· Davis Â· Finerty Â· Lawler Â·
McGann Â· Lorimer Â· Feely Â· Mann Â· Hull Â· Moynihan Â· McKeough Â· Rowan Â·
Vail Â· O'Hara Â· Vail Â· O'Hara Â· Mikva Â· Murphy Â· Savage Â· Reynolds Â·
Jackson  
3rd district

Duncan Â· May Â· Stuart Â· Ficklin Â· Young Â· Ficklin Â· Norton Â· Lovejoy Â·
Washburne Â· Burchard Â· Farwell Â· Le Moyne Â· Brentano Â· Barber Â· Farwell
Â· Davis Â· Ward Â· Mason Â· Durborow Â· McGann Â· Belknap Â· Foster Â· Wilson
Â· Gorman Â· Wilson Â· Sproul Â· Kelly Â· Busbey Â· Kelly Â· Busbey Â· Linehan
Â· Busbey Â· Murray Â· Byrne Â· Murphy, W. Â· Murphy, M. Â· Hanrahan Â· Russo
Â· Lipinski, B. Â· Lipinski, D.  
4th district

Wentworth Â· Molony Â· Knox Â· Kellogg Â· Harris Â· Harding Â· Hawley Â·
Hurlbut Â· Lathrop Â· Sherwin Â· Adams Â· Newberry Â· Goldzier Â· Woodman Â·
Mills Â· Cusack Â· McAndrews Â· Foster Â· Wharton Â· McDermott Â· Martin Â·
Rainey Â· Doyle Â· Beam Â· Gorski Â· Buckley Â· McVey Â· Derwinksi Â· O'Brien
Â· Davis Â· Sangmeister Â· GutiÃ©rrez  
5th district

Douglas Â· Richardson Â· Davis Â· Morris Â· Richardson Â· Lovejoy Â· Ingersoll
Â· Stevens Â· Burchard Â· Hawk Â· Hitt Â· Ellwood Â· Hopkins Â· White Â·
Noonan Â· Mahoney Â· McAndrews Â· Michalek Â· Sabath Â· Gorski Â· Kluczynski
Â· Fary Â· Lipinski, B. Â· Rostenkowski Â· Flanagan Â· Blagojevich Â· Emanuel  
6th district

Hoge Â· Turner Â· Baker Â· Campbell Â· Yates Â· Harris Â· Hodges Â· McClernand
Â· Knapp Â· Norton Â· Cook Â· Snapp Â· Hawley Â· Henderson Â· Hitt Â· Cooke Â·
Boutell Â· Lorimer Â· Moxley Â· Stack Â· McAndrews Â· Gorman Â· Buckley Â·
Gorman Â· Igoe Â· O'Brien Â· Maciejewski Â· O'Brien Â· Ronan Â· Collins Â·
CÃ´llier Â· Hyde Â· Roskam  
7th district

Hardin Â· Baker Â· Henry Â· Lincoln Â· Harris Â· Yates Â· Allen, J. Â· Shaw Â·
Robinson Â· Eden Â· Bromwell Â· Moore Â· Corwin Â· Campbell Â· Hayes Â· Cullen
Â· Henderson Â· Foss Â· Knopf Â· Lundin Â· Buchanan Â· Juul Â· Michaelson Â·
Schuetz Â· Link Â· Owens Â· Sabath Â· Bowler Â· Libonati Â· Annunzio Â·
Collins Â· Davis  
8th district

Bissell Â· Morrison Â· Smith Â· Fouke Â· Stuart Â· Cullom Â· Robinson Â· Fort
Â· Payson Â· Cullen Â· Plumb Â· Hill Â· Steward Â· Childs Â· Hopkins Â·
Mahoney Â· McGavin Â· Gallagher Â· Kunz Â· Granata Â· Kunz Â· Kocialkowski Â·
Gordon Â· Rostenkowski Â· Crane Â· Bean  
9th district

Allen, Willis Â· Marshall Â· Logan Â· Allen, William Â· Ross Â· McNeely Â·
Barrere Â· Whiting Â· Boyd Â· Lewis Â· Payson Â· Snow Â· Wheeler Â· Hitt Â·
Boutell Â· Evans Â· Britten Â· McAndrews Â· Dewey Â· Resa Â· Twyman Â· Yates
Â· Finnegan Â· Yates Â· Schakowsky  
10th district

Knapp Â· Thornton Â· Burr Â· Rice Â· Ray Â· Bagby Â· Marsh Â· Worthington Â·
Post Â· Prince Â· Foss Â· Thomson Â· Foss Â· Chindblom Â· Simpson Â· Church Â·
Paddock Â· Church Â· Hoffman Â· CÃ´llier Â· Young Â· Mikva Â· Porter Â· Kirk  
11th district

Robinson Â· Marshall Â· Knapp Â· Wike Â· Knapp Â· Singleton Â· Neece Â· Gest
Â· Cable Â· Marsh Â· Reeves Â· Snapp Â· Copley Â· Reid Â· Reed Â· Chesney Â·
Sheehan Â· Pucinski Â· Annunzio Â· Sangmeister Â· Weller Â· Halvorson  
12th district

Morrison Â· Baker Â· Hay Â· Robinson Â· Springer Â· Riggs Â· Anderson Â· Wike
Â· McDannold Â· Cannon Â· Fuller Â· Hinebaugh Â· Fuller Â· Buckbee Â· Mason Â·
Jonas Â· Boyle Â· Finnegan Â· McClory Â· Crane Â· Costello  
13th district

Allen, William Â· Kuykendall Â· Raum Â· Crebs Â· McNulta Â· Stevenson Â·
Tipton Â· Stevenson Â· Smith, D. Â· Springer Â· Warner Â· Hitt Â· Lowden Â·
McKenzie Â· Johnson Â· Allen Â· Church, R. Â· Church, M. Â· Rumsfeld Â· Crane
Â· McClory Â· Erlenborn Â· Farwell Â· Biggert  
At-large

(38th United States Congressâ42nd McLean Â· Cook Â· Duncan Â· Allen, J. Â·
Moulton Â· Logan Â· Beveridge) Â· (53rd Black Â· Hunter) Â· (63rdâ80th Seat
1: Stringer Â· Chiperfield Â· McCormick Â· Yates Â· Brennan Â· Champion Â·
Martin Â· Day Â· Douglas Â· Stratton) Â· (63rdâ77th Seat 2: Williams Â·
Mason Â· Huck Â· Rathbone Â· McCormick Â· Dieterich Â· Nesbit Â· Igoe Â· Long
Â· Smith Â· Stratton)  
Terr

Bond Â· Stephenson Â· Pope  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Districts created after 1863  
14th district

Cannon Â· Rowell Â· Scott Â· Funk Â· Graff Â· McKinney Â· Tavenner Â· Graham
Â· Allen Â· Thompson Â· Johnson Â· Reed Â· Keeney Â· Hoffman Â· Erlenborn Â·
Corcoran Â· Grotberg Â· Hastert Â· Foster

Seal of the United States House  
Flag of Illinois  
15th district

Eden Â· Forsythe Â· Moulton Â· Cannon Â· Busey Â· Cannon Â· Marsh Â· Mickey Â·
Prince Â· Hoxworth Â· King Â· Chiperfield, B. Â· Adair Â· Boyer Â·
Chiperfield, R. Â· Mason Â· Reid Â· Arends Â· Hall Â· Corcoran Â· Madigan Â·
Ewing Â· Johnson  
16th district

Martin Â· Sparks Â· Shaw Â· Landes Â· Fithian Â· Downing Â· Rinaker Â·
Hinrichsen Â· Williams Â· Selby Â· Graff Â· Stone Â· Ireland Â· Hull Â·
Dirksen Â· Allen Â· Anderson Â· Martin Â· Cox Â· Manzullo  
17th district

Morrison Â· Moulton Â· Eden Â· Lane Â· Connolly Â· Caldwell Â· Sterling Â·
Fitzhenry Â· Sterling Â· Smith Â· Funk Â· Hall Â· Gillespie Â· Arends Â·
O'Brien Â· Evans Â· Hare  
18th district

Clements Â· Hartzell Â· Thomas Â· Morrison Â· Baker Â· Forman Â· Remann Â·
Hadley Â· Jett Â· Cannon Â· O'Hair Â· Cannon Â· Holaday Â· Meeks Â· Sumner Â·
Jenison Â· Velde Â· Michel Â· LaHood Â· Schock  
19th district

O'Brien Â· Anderson Â· Townshend Â· Williams Â· Wood Â· Hunter Â· Crowley Â·
Warner Â· McKinley Â· Borchers Â· McKinley Â· Moore Â· Adkins Â· Dobbins Â·
Rigney Â· Wheat Â· McMillen Â· Chiperfield Â· McLoskey Â· Schisler Â·
Railsback Â· Crane Â· Bruce Â· Poshard Â· Phelps Â· Shimkus  
20th district

Thomas Â· Smith Â· Burrell Â· Campbell Â· Williams Â· Rainey Â· Shaw Â· Rainey
Â· Lucas Â· Barnes Â· Simpson, S. Â· Simpson, E. Â· Findley Â· Durbin Â·
Shimkus  
21st district

Murphy Â· Baker Â· Rodenberg Â· Kern Â· Caldwell Â· Rives Â· Caldwell Â·
Graham Â· Wheeler Â· Major Â· Wheeler Â· Major Â· Ramey Â· Major Â· Mason Â·
Fries Â· Howell Â· Mack Â· Gray Â· Madigan Â· Price Â· Costello  
22nd district

Smith Â· Rodenberg Â· Baltz Â· Rodenberg Â· Miller Â· Irwin Â· Karch Â·
Schaefer Â· Johnson Â· Price Â· McMillen Â· Springer Â· Shipley Â· Crane Â·
Simon Â· Gray Â· Poshard  
23rd district

Crowley Â· Dickson Â· Foster Â· Brooks Â· Arnold, W. Â· Arnold, L. Â· Vursell
Â· Jenison Â· Vursell Â· Shipley Â· Price  
24th district

Williams Â· Chapman Â· Fowler Â· Williams Â· Parsons Â· Heidinger Â·
Clippinger Â· Vursell Â· Price Â· Gray Â· Simon  
25th district

Smith Â· Thistlewood Â· Hill Â· Denison Â· Keller Â· Bishop Â· Price Â· Bishop
Â· Gray  
26th district

Bishop  
Persondata  
NAME Emanuel, Rahm  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Politician, investment banker, White House Chief of Staff  
DATE OF BIRTH 1959-11-29  
PLACE OF BIRTH Chicago, Illinois  
DATE OF DEATH  
PLACE OF DEATH  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rahm_Emanuel"

Categories: 1959 births | Living people | American businesspeople | American
Jews | Clinton Administration personnel | Illinois Democrats | Jewish American
politicians | Members of the United States House of Representatives from
Illinois | New Trier High School alumni | Northwestern University alumni |
Obama Administration cabinet members | People from Chicago, Illinois | People
from Wilmette, Illinois | Sarah Lawrence College alumni | White House Chiefs
of Staff

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles
containing Hebrew language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 12 April 2009, at 01:37 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



