
# Transhuman

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about an evolutionary concept. For the ideology and movement,
see transhumanism.

Transhuman is a term that refers to an evolutionary transition from the human
to the posthuman.[1]

## [edit] History

Questioning the parameters of being human and its relationship with nature
have been of philosophical interest before and since Socrates. Questioning the
future of the human brings to light moral, religious and philosophical belief
systems and, especially, ethical concerns regarding tampering with human
nature and what is considered by many, especially in Western culture, to be
natural.[2]

The etymology of the term "transhuman" goes back to futurist FM-2030 (born
Fereidoun M. Esfandiary) who, while teaching new concepts of the human at The
New School university in 1966, introduced it as shorthand for "transitory
human". Calling transhumans the "earliest manifestation of new evolutionary
beings," FM argued that signs of transhumans included physical and mental
augmentations including prostheses, reconstructive surgery, intensive use of
telecommunications, a cosmopolitan outlook and a globetrotting lifestyle,
androgyny, mediated reproduction (such as in vitro fertilisation), absence of
religious beliefs, and a rejection of traditional family values.[1]

The concept of transhuman, as an evolutionary transition, was first expressed
by FM-2030 outside the confines of academia in his contributing final chapter
to the 1972 anthology Woman, Year 2000.[3] In the same year, Robert Ettinger
contributed to conceptualization of "transhumanity" in his book Man into
Superman.[4] In 1982, Natasha Vita-More authored the Transhuman Manifesto
1982: Transhumanist Arts Statement and outlined what she perceived as an
emerging transhuman culture.[5]

Many thinkers today do not consider FM-2030's characteristics to be essential
attributes of a transhuman. However, analyzing the possible transitional
nature of the human species has been and continues to be of primary interest
to anthropologists and philosophers within and outside the intellectual
movement of transhumanism.[6]

In March 2007, Gregory Cochran of the University of Utah in Salt Lake City,
Utah, and John Hawks of the University of Wisconsin-Madison published a study,
alongside other recent research on which it builds, which amounts to a radical
reappraisal of traditional views, which tended to assume that humans have
reached an evolutionary endpoint. Jeffrey McKee of the Ohio State University
said the new findings of accelerated evolution bear out predictions he made in
a 2000 book The Riddled Chain. Based on computer models, he argued that
evolution should speed up as a population grows because population growth
creates more opportunities for new mutations; and the expanded population
occupies new environmental niches, which would drive evolution in new
directions. Whatever the implications of the recent findings, McKee concludes
that they highlight a ubiquitous point about evolution: âevery species is a
transitional species.â[7]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b FM-2030 (1989). Are You a Transhuman?: Monitoring and Stimulating Your Personal Rate of Growth in a Rapidly Changing World. Viking Adult. ISBN 0-446-38806-8.
  2. ^ More, Max (1999). Letter to Mother Nature. http://www.maxmore.com/mother.htm. Retrieved on 2007-02-16.
  3. ^ Vita-More, Natasha (2000). FM-2030 One of the Spearheading Transhumanists. http://www.transhuman.org/fm-2030story.htm. Retrieved on 2007-02-16.
  4. ^ Ettinger, Robert (1974). Man into Superman. Avon. ISBN 0-380-00047-4. http://www.cryonics.org/book2.html.
  5. ^ Vita-More, Natasha (1982; revised 2003). Tranhumanist Arts Statement. http://www.transhumanist.biz/transhumanistartsmanifesto.htm. Retrieved on 2006-02-16.
  6. ^ Bostrom, Nick (2002-2005) (PDF). The Transhumanist FAQ. World Transhumanist Association. http://www.transhumanism.org/resources/FAQv21.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-08-27.
  7. ^ Human evolution, radically reappraised. World Science. 2007-03-27. http://www.world-science.net/exclusives/070326_evolution.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.

## [edit] External links

  * More, Max (2004). On Becoming Posthuman. http://www.maxmore.com/becoming.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-04.
  * Space of Possible Modes of Being
  * Transhuman World Culture Informark
    * Transhuman History
  * World Transhumanist Association
  * Transhumanist Social Network

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transhuman"

Categories: Humans | Human evolution | Transhumanism

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 15 May 2009, at 05:55 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



