
# Copenhagen

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Copenhagen (disambiguation).

City of Copenhagen  
KÃ¸benhavn  
Skyline of City of Copenhagen  
Official logo of City of Copenhagen  
Coat of arms  
City of Copenhagen

Location of Copenhagen in Denmark  
Coordinates: 55Â°40â²34â³N 12Â°34â²06â³Eï»¿ / ï»¿55.67611Â°N
12.56833Â°Eï»¿ / 55.67611; 12.56833Coordinates: 55Â°40â²34â³N
12Â°34â²06â³Eï»¿ / ï»¿55.67611Â°N 12.56833Â°Eï»¿ / 55.67611; 12.56833  
Country Denmark  
Municipalities

29

Copenhagen Municipality  
Albertslund Municipality  
AllerÃ¸d Municipality  
Ballerup  
Bornholm  
BrÃ¸ndby  
DragÃ¸r  
Egedal Municipality  
Fredensborg Municipality  
Frederiksberg  
Frederikssund  
FuresÃ¸ municipality  
Gentofte  
Gladsaxe  
Glostrup  
Gribskov municipality  
HalsnÃ¦s municipality  
HelsingÃ¸r municipality  
Herlev  
HillerÃ¸d  
Hvidovre  
HÃ¸je-Taastrup  
HÃ¸rsholm  
IshÃ¸j  
Lyngby-TaarbÃ¦k  
Rudersdal municipality  
RÃ¸dovre  
TÃ¥rnby  
VallensbÃ¦k[1]  
Region Hovedstaden  
First mention 11th century  
City Status 13th century  
Government  
- Mayor Ritt Bjerregaard (S)  
Area [2]  
\- Urban 455.61 km2 (175.9 sq mi)  
Population (2008 and 2009)[3]  
- City 518,574 (2,009)  
- Density 5,876/km2 (15,218.8/sq mi)  
\- Urban 1,153,615 (2,008)  
\- Metro 1,875,179 ((2,009) 34 closest municipalities)  
Time zone CET (UTC+1)  
- Summer (DST) CEST (UTC+2)  
Website www.kk.dk/english  
Copenhagen (IPA: /ËkÉÊpÉnËheÉªgÉn/[4]); Danish: KÃ¸benhavn (helpÂ·info)
IPA: [kÊ°Ã¸bÌ¥ÉnËhÉÊÌ¯Ën])[5] is the capital and largest city of Denmark,
with an urban area with a population of 1,153,615 (2008) and a metropolitan
area with a population of 1,881,000 (2008). Copenhagen is situated on the
Islands of Zealand and Amager.

First documented in the 11th century, Copenhagen became the capital of Denmark
in the beginning of the 15th century and during the 17th century under the
reign of Christian IV it became an important regional centre. With the
completion of the transnational Oresund Bridge in 2000, Copenhagen has become
the centre of the increasingly integrating Ãresund Region with around 3.7
million inhabitants covering an area of 20,869 kmÂ² (177/kmÂ²). Within this
region, Copenhagen and MalmÃ¶ is in the process of growing into one common
metropolitan area. Copenhagen is the most visited city of the Nordic Countries
with around 1.3 million international tourists every year.[6]

Copenhagen is a major regional center of culture, business, media, and
science. In 2008 Copenhagen was ranked #4 by Financial Times-owned FDi
magazine on their list of Top50 European Cities of the Future after London,
Paris and Berlin.[7] In the 2008 Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index,
published by MasterCard, Copenhagen was ranked 14th in the world and 1st in
Scandinavia.[8] Life science, information technology and shipping are
important sectors and research & development plays a major role in the city's
economy. Its strategic location and excellent infrastructure with the largest
airport in Scandinavia[9] located 14 minutes by train from the city centre,
has made it a regional hub and a popular location for regional
headquarters[10] as well as conventions.

Copenhagen has repeatedly been recognized as one of the cities with the best
quality of life[11][12][13] and in 2008 it was singled out as the Most
Liveable City in the World by international lifestyle magazine Monocle on
their Top 25 Most Liveable Cities 2008 list.[14] It is also considered one of
the world's most environmentally friendly cities with the water in the inner
harbor being so clean that it can be used for swimming and 36 % of all
citizens commuting to work by bicycle, every day bicycling a total 1.1 million
km. Since the turn of the millennium Copenhagen has seen a strong urban and
cultural development and has been described as a boom town.[15] This is partly
due to massive investments in cultural facilities as well as infrastructure
and a new wave of successful designers, chefs and architects.[16]

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Geography
    * 2.1 Location
    * 2.2 Copenhagen Municipality
    * 2.3 Greater Copenhagen
      * 2.3.1 Suburbs: The Finger Plan
    * 2.4 Climate
  * 3 Cityscape
    * 3.1 Architecture
    * 3.2 Parks
    * 3.3 Beaches
  * 4 Demographics
  * 5 Culture and recreation
    * 5.1 Museums
    * 5.2 Music and entertainment
    * 5.3 Sports
    * 5.4 Amusement parks
    * 5.5 Cuisine
    * 5.6 Media
  * 6 Annual events
  * 7 Economy
  * 8 Education, science, research
    * 8.1 Medicon Valley
    * 8.2 Cleantech
  * 9 Transport
    * 9.1 Roads
    * 9.2 Bicycling
    * 9.3 Harbour
    * 9.4 Airports
    * 9.5 Public transportation
  * 10 Environment
  * 11 Copenhagen in international rankings
  * 12 Twin towns - Sister cities
  * 13 See also
  * 14 References
  * 15 External links

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Copenhagen c. 1895

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Palace during renovation.

Main article: History of Copenhagen

From its humble origins as a fishing village to its heyday as the glittering
capital of the Danish Empire, to its current position as one of the world's
premier design capitals, the stories and characters of Copenhagen's history
can be discovered in its sumptuous palaces, copper-roofed town houses and
atmospheric cobbled squares. From the Viking Age there was a fishing village
by the name of "Havn" (harbour) at the site. Recent archeological finds
indicate that by the 11th century, Copenhagen had already grown into a small
town with a large estate, a church, a market, at least two wells and many
smaller habitations spread over a fairly wide area.[17] From the middle of the
12th century it grew in importance after coming into the possession of the
Bishop Absalon, who fortified it in 1167, the year traditionally marking the
foundation of Copenhagen. The excellent harbour encouraged Copenhagen's growth
until it became an important centre of commerce. The city's origin as a
harbour and a place of commerce is reflected in its name. Its original
designation, from which the contemporary Danish name is derived, was
KÃ¸pmannÃ¦hafn, "merchants' harbour". The English name for the city is derived
from its Low German name, Kopenhagen. The element hafnium is also named for
Copenhagen, whose Latin name is Hafnia.[18]

It was repeatedly attacked by the Hanseatic League as the Germans took notice.
In 1254, it received its charter as a city under Bishop Jakob Erlandsen.

During 1658-59 it withstood a severe siege by the Swedes under Charles X and
successfully repelled a major assault. In 1801 a British fleet under Admiral
Parker fought a major battle, the Battle of Copenhagen, with the Danish Navy
in Copenhagen harbour. It was during this battle Lord Nelson famously "put the
telescope to the blind eye" in order not to see Admiral Parker's signal to
cease fire. When a British expeditionary force bombarded Copenhagen in 1807,
to gain control of the Danish Navy, the city suffered great damage and
hundreds of people were killed. The reason why the devastation was so great
was that Copenhagen relied on an old defence-line rendered virtually useless
by the increase in shooting range available to the British. But not until the
1850s were the ramparts of the city opened to allow new housing to be built
around the lakes ("SÃ¸erne") which bordered the old defence system to the
west. This dramatic increase of space was long overdue, not only because the
old ramparts were out of date as a defence system, but also because of bad
sanitation in the old city. Before the opening, Copenhagen Center was
inhabited by approximately 125,000 people, peaking in the census of 1870
(140,000); today the figure is around 25,000. In 1901, Copenhagen expanded
further, incorporating communities with 40,000 people, and in the process
making Frederiksberg an enclave within Copenhagen.

During World War II, Copenhagen was occupied by German troops along with the
rest of the country from 9 April 1940 until 4 May 1945. In August 1943, when
the government's collaboration with the occupation forces collapsed, several
ships were sunk in Copenhagen Harbour by the Royal Danish Navy to prevent them
being used by the Germans. The city has grown greatly since the war, in the
seventies using the so-called five-finger-plan of commuter train lines to
surrounding towns and suburbs.

Since the summer 2000, the cities of Copenhagen and MalmÃ¶ have been connected
by a toll bridge/tunnel (Ãresund Bridge), which allows both rail and road
passengers to cross. As a result, Copenhagen has become the centre of a larger
metropolitan area which spans both nations. The construction of the bridge has
led to a large number of changes to the public transportation system and the
extensive redevelopment of Amager, south of the main city.

## [edit] Geography

### [edit] Location

<IMG>

<IMG>

Copenhagen City Hall

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kongens Nytorv

Copenhagen is located on the eastern shore of the island of Zealand
(SjÃ¦lland), partly on the island of Amager and on a number of natural and
artificial islets in between the two. Copenhagen faces the Ãresund to the
east, the strait of water that separates Denmark from Sweden, and that
connects the North Sea with the Baltic Sea. On the Swedish side of the sound
directly across from Copenhagen, lie the towns of MalmÃ¶ and Landskrona.

Copenhagen is also a part of the Ãresund region, which consists of Zealand,
Lolland-Falster and Bornholm in Denmark and Scania in Sweden.

### [edit] Copenhagen Municipality

Copenhagen Municipality is an administrative unit that covers the central part
of the actual city of Copenhagen. It is a fairly small part of the actual city
that falles within the municipality both because it covers a very confined
area and because the enclave of Frederiksberg is an independent municipality.
Copenhagen consists of a number of boroughs and areas,

  * Indre By
  * Ãsterbro
  * NÃ¸rrebro
  * Vesterbro
  * Amagerbro
  * Nordhavnen (North Habour)
  * Valby
  * Kongens Enghave (King's Meadow Garden), also known as Sydhavnen (meaning South Harbour)
  * Christianshavn
  * Christiania (Freetown)
  * Sundbyvester (Sundby West),
  * SundbyÃ¸ster (Sundby East)
  * Ãrestad
  * Islands Brygge
  * BellahÃ¸j
  * BrÃ¸nshÃ¸j
  * Ryparken
  * Bispebjerg
  * Vigerslev
  * Vestamager
  * VanlÃ¸se

The suffix -bro in the names Ãsterbro, NÃ¸rrebro, Vesterbro and Amagerbro
should not be confused with the Danish word for bridge, which is also 'bro'.
The term is thought to be an abbreviation or short form of the Danish word
brolagt meaning paved referring to the roads paved with cobblestones leading
to the city's former gates -

### [edit] Greater Copenhagen

The conurbation of Copenhagen consists of several municipalities. After
Copenhagen Municipality, the second largest is Frederiksberg Municipality
which is an enclave inside Copenhagen Municipality. Both are contained in the
larger Capital Region of Denmark, which contains most of the Copenhagen
metropolitan area.

Previously, the areas of Frederiksberg, Gentofte and Copenhagen municipalities
have been used to define the city of Copenhagen. This definition is now
obsolete. To meet statistical needs after the latest municipal reform, which
took place in the beginning of 2007, an effort has been made to work out
definitions of lands (landsdele) in Denmark. A land is basically a
geographical and statistical definition, and the area is not considered to be
an administrative unit. The land of Copenhagen City includes the
municipalities of Copenhagen, DragÃ¸r, Frederiksberg and TÃ¥rnby, with a total
population of 667,228 in the beginning of 2009.[19][20]

Copenhagen and Frederiksberg were two of the three last Danish municipalities
not belonging to a county. On 1 January 2007, the municipalities lost their
county privileges and became part of Copenhagen Capital Region.

#### [edit] Suburbs: The Finger Plan

Suburban Copenhagen is planned according to the Finger Plan, fingerplanen,
initiated in 1947, dividing the suburbs into five fingers.[21] The S-train
lines are built according to the Finger Plan, while green wedges and highways
are built in-between the fingers.

### [edit] Climate

Summers in Copenhagen have average high temperatures of around 21Â°C (70Â°F)
and lows of 13Â°C (55Â°F), but temperatures could sometimes exceed 25Â°C
(77Â°F+) and occasional heatwaves are common during the summer. Winters
usually have temperatures of -2 to 4Â°C (28 - 40Â°F), rarely dropping below
â10 Â°C (14 Â°F).

Precipitation is moderate throughout the year, and snowfall occurs mainly in
December through March, but snow cover does not remain a long time.

  

<IMG> Weather averages for Copenhagen <IMG>  
Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year  
Average high Â°C (Â°F) 2  
(36) 3  
(37) 6  
(43) 11  
(52) 16  
(61) 19  
(66) 21  
(70) 21  
(70) 17  
(63) 12  
(54) 7  
(45) 4  
(39) 11.6  
(53)  
Average low Â°C (Â°F) -1  
(30) -2  
(28) 0  
(32) 3  
(37) 7  
(45) 11  
(52) 13  
(55) 13  
(55) 10  
(50) 7  
(45) 3  
(37) 0  
(32) 3  
(37)  
Precipitation mm (inches) 53  
(2.09) 33  
(1.3) 43  
(1.69) 43  
(1.69) 46  
(1.81) 56  
(2.2) 74  
(2.91) 61  
(2.4) 61  
(2.4) 59  
(2.32) 66  
(2.6) 61  
(2.4) 656  
(25.83)  
Source: World Weather Information Service[22] 2008-01-06  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Gefion Fountain

## [edit] Cityscape

The city's appearance today is shaped by the key role it has played as a
regional center for centuries. Copenhagen has a multitude of districts, each
representing its time and with its own distinctive character, making up a
dense urban fabric. Other distinctive features of the Copenhagen of today is
the abundance of water, the greenness and the elaborate system of bicycle
paths that line almost every major street.

### [edit] Architecture

See also: Architecture in Copenhagen and List of buildings in and around
Copenhagen

The oldest section of Copenhagen's inner city is often referred to as
"Middelalderbyen" (The Medieval City). However, the most distinctive district
of Copenhagen is Frederiksstaden developed during the reign of Frederick V. It
has Amalienborg Palace at its centre and is dominated by the dome of the
Marble Church as well as a number of elegant 18th century mansions. Also part
of the old inner city of Copenhagen is the small island of Slotsholmen with
Christiansborg Palace and Christianshavn. Around the historical city center
lies a band of congenial residential bouroughs (Vesterbro, Inner NÃ¸rrebro,
Inner Ãsterbro) dating mainly from late 19th century. They were built outside
the old ramparts of the city when the city was finally allowed to expand
beyond this barrier.

Sometimes referred to as "the City of Spires", Copenhagen is known for its
horizontal skyline, only broken by spires at churches and castles. Most
characteristic is the baroque spire of Church of Our Saviour with its
spiralling and narrowing external stairs that visitors can climb to the very
top of the spire. Other important spires are those of Christiansborg Palace,
the City Hall and the former Church of St. Nikolaj that now houses a modern
art venue. A bit lower are the renaissance spires of Rosenborg Castle and the
"dragon spire" of [[Christian IV of Christian IV's former stock exchange, so
named because it is shaped as the tails of four dragons twined together.

Recent years have seen a tremendous boom in modern architecture in
Copenhagen[23] both when it comes to Danish architecture and works by
international architects. For a few hundred years, virtually no foreign
architects had worked in Copenhagen but since the turn of the millennium the
city and its immediate sourroundings have seen buildings and projects from
such international star architects as Foster[24], Hadid[25], Nouvel[26] and
Liebeskind[27]. In the same time, a number of Danish architects have achieved
great success both in Copenhagen and abroad. This has led to a number of
international architecture awards. Buildings in Copenhagen have won RIBA
European Awards four years in a row ("Sampension" in 2005[28], "Kilen" in
2006[29], "Tietgenkollegiet" in 2007[30] and the Royal Playhouse in 2008[31]).
At the 2008 World Architecture Festival in Barcelona, Bjarke Ingels Group won
an award for the World's Best Residential Building 2008 for a house in
Ãrestad.[32] The Forum AID Award for Best building in Scandinavia went to
Copenhagen buildings both in 2006[33] and 2008[34]. In 2008 British design
magazine Monocle named Copenhagen the World's best design city 2008.[35]

The boom in urban development and modern architecture means that the above
mentioned horizontal skyline has seen some changes. A political majority has
decided to keep the historical center free of highrises. But several areas
will see or have already seen massive urban development. Ãrestad is the area
that until now has seen most of the development. Located near Copenhagen
Airport, it currently boasts the largest mall in Scandinavia and a variety of
office and residential buildings as well as an IT University and a high
school. The two largest hotels in Scandinavia are currently under construction
(ultimo 2008). An ambitious regeneration project will create a new Carlsberg
District at the historical premises of the Carlsberg Breweries that has
terminated the production of beer in Copenhagen and moved it to Jutland. The
district will have a total of nine highrises and seeks to mix the old
industrial buildings with modern architecture to create a dense, maze-like
quarter with a focus on sustainability and an active urban life. A third major
area of urban development also with a focus on sustanibility is Nordhavn. The
Copenhagen tradition with urban development on artificial islands that was
initiated with Christianh IV's construction of Christianshavn has recently
been continued with the creation of Havneholmen as well as a "canal city" in
the South Harbour. A district in Copenhagen with a very different take on
modern architecture is that of Christiania whose many creative and
idiosyncratic buildings are exponents of an "architecture without architects".

File:GrÃ¥brÃ¸dretorv KÃ¸benhavn.jpg

### [edit] Parks

Main article: Parks and open spaces in Copenhagen

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ãstre AnlÃ¦g

<IMG>

<IMG>

University of Copenhagen Botanical Garden

Copenhagen is a green city with many big and small parks. King's Garden, the
garden of Rosenborg Castle, is the oldest and most visited park in
Copenhagen.[36] Its landscaping was commenced by Christian IV in 1606. Every
year it sees more than 2,5 million visitors[37] and in the summer months it is
packed with sunbathers, picknickers and ballplayers. It also serves as a
sculpture garden with a permanent display of sculptures as well as temporary
exhibits during summer.[38] Also located in the city centre are the Botanical
Gardens particularly noted for their large complex of 19th century greenhouses
donated by Carlsberg founder J. C. Jacobsen.[39] FÃ¦lledparken is with its 58
hectars the largest park in Copenhagen.[40] It is popular for sports and hosts
a long array of annual events like a free opera concert at the opening of the
opera season, other open-air concerts, carnival, Labour Day celebrations and
Copenhagen Historic Grand Prix which is a race for antique cars. A historical
green space in the northeastern part of the city is Kastellet which is a well-
presserved renaissance citadel that now serves mainly as a park. Another
popular park is the Frederiksberg Garden which is a 32 hectars romantic
landscape park. It houses a large colony of very tame grey herons along with
other waterfowls. The park also offers views of the elephants and the elephant
house designed by world-famous British architect Norman Foster of the adjacent
Copenhagen Zoo.

Characteristic of Copenhagen is that a number of cemeteries double as parks,
though only for the more quiet activities such as sunbathing, reading and
meditation.[41] Assistens Cemetery, the burial place of Hans Christian
Andersen among others, is an important green space for the district of Inner
NÃ¸rrebro and a Copenhagen institution. The lesser known Vestre Kirkegaard is
with its 54 hectars the largest cemetery in Denmark[42] and offers a maze of
dense groves, open lawns, winding paths, hedges, overgrown tombs, monuments,
tree-lined avenues, lakes and other garden features.

It is official municipal policy in Copenhagen that all citizens by 2015 must
be able to reach a park or beach on foot in less than 15 minutes.[43] In line
with this policy, several new parks are under development in areas poor in
green spaces.[44][45]

### [edit] Beaches

Copenhagen and the surrounding areas have 3 beaches with a total of approx. 8
km of sandy beaches within 30 minutes of bicycling from the city centre. This
includes Amager Strandpark, which opened in 2005 and includes a 2 km long
artificial island and a total of 4,6 km of beaches[46], located just 15
minutes by bicycle or a few minutes by metro from the city centre.

The beaches are supplemented by a system of harbour baths along the Copenhagen
waterfront. The first and most popular of these is located at Islands
Brygge[47] and has won international acclaim for its design.[48]

## [edit] Demographics

Depending on the boundaries used, the population of Copenhagen differs.
Statistics Denmark uses a measure of the contiguously built-up urban area of
Copenhagen, this means the number of communities included in this statistical
abstract has changed several times, in the abstracts latest edition with close
to 1.2 million (1,153,615 (2008)) inhabitants. This number is not a strict
result of the commonly-used measuring methods of 200 meters of continuously
build-up area, as there are exceptions to the general rule: The suburbs of
BirkerÃ¸d and HÃ¸rsholm are excluded, while all of BrÃ¸ndby and parts of
IshÃ¸j and Greve are included.[citations needed] Statistics Denmark has never
stated the geographical area of urban Copenhagen. However, we know it consists
of Copenhagen Municipality, Frederiksberg and 16 of the 20 municipalities in
the old counties Copenhagen and Roskilde, though 5 of them only partially.[49]

Statistics Denmark has worked out definitions of so-called lands (landsdele),
a definition used to meet statistical needs on a lower level than regions.
From this, the land of Copenhagen city (KÃ¸benhavn by) is defined by the
municipalities of Copenhagen, DragÃ¸r, Frederiksberg and TÃ¥rnby, with a total
population of 667,228 in the beginning of 2009.[19][20] The surroundings of
Copenhagen is defined by another land, Copenhagen suburban (KÃ¸benhavns
omegn), which includes the municipalities of Albertslund, Ballerup, BrÃ¸ndby,
Gentofte, Gladsaxe, Glostrup, Herlev, Hvidovre, HÃ¸je-Taastrup, IshÃ¸j,
Lyngby-TaarbÃ¦k, RÃ¸dovre and VallensbÃ¦k, and with a total population of
508,183 (January 1, 2009).[19][20] This gives a total population of 1,171,709
for these two lands together. The lands of Copenhagen city and Copenhagen
suburban can together be used as a definition of the metropolitan area,
although perhaps a somewhat narrow one.

From 1 January 2009 the population of the 34 municipalities closest to and
including the municipality of Copenhagen is 1.875.179.[50] Land area: 2,923
kmÂ². (Capital Region - Bornholm + East Zealand + Stevns) .[51] Thus, the
region comprises 6.8% of the land area of Denmark, but has 34% of Denmark's
population. This gives a total of 667 inhabitants per kmÂ² or 1,660 per square
mile for the region. This compares with a population density in the rest of
the country of approximately 90 per kmÂ² or around 230 per square mile.

Based on a 10%-isoline (data from 2002) in which at least 10% commutes into
central parts of the Copenhagen area, most of Zealand would be covered and
this area has a population of about 2.3 million inhabitants.[52]

Since the opening of the Ãresund Bridge in 2000, commuting between and
integration of Greater MalmÃ¶ and Copenhagen have increased rapidly, and a
combined statistical metropolitan area has formed. This combined metropolitan
area, which has a population of 2,488,551 (2009) is expected to be officially
defined by the respective statistics divisions of Denmark and Sweden in the
upcoming years.[citations needed]

A high-ranking civil servant of the Interior Ministry, Henning StrÃ¸m, who was
involved in (i.e. known as "the Father of") a past municipal reform, which
took effect on 1 April 1970, said on television, broadcast in connection with
the recent Kommunalreformen ("The Municipal Reform" of 2007), that Copenhagen
municipality would encompass an area with 1.5 million inhabitants, if the
principles of the 1970 municipal reform were also applied on Copenhagen
municipality.[53] In other words: in the rest of Denmark the city occupies
only part of the municipality, but in Copenhagen the municipality of
Copenhagen occupies only part of the city of Copenhagen.

## [edit] Culture and recreation

Since the late 1990s, Copenhagen has undergone a transformation from a cozy
Scandinavian capital to a cool metropolitan city of international scope in the
league of cities like Barcelona and Amsterdam.[54] This is due to massive
investments in infrastructure as well as culture and wave of new successful
Danish architects, designers and chefs. [55][56]

### [edit] Museums

See also: List of museums in and around Copenhagen

Copenhagen has a wide array of museums of International standard. The National
Museum, Nationalmuseet, is Denmark's largest museum of Archaeology and
cultural history, comprising the histories of Danish and foreign cultures
alike. The National Gallery \- "Statens Museum for Kunst" - is Denmark's
national art museum and contains collections dating from 12th century and all
the way up to present day artists. Among artists represented in the
collections are Rubens, Rembrandt, Picasso, Braque, LÃ©ger, Matisse and Emil
Nolde. Another important Copenhagen art museum is the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek
founded by second generation Carlsberg tycoon-philanthropist Carl Jacobsen and
is built around his personal collections. Its main focus is classical
Egyptian, Roman and Greek sculptures and other antiquities and a collection of
Rodin sculptures that is the largest outside France[57] (Glypto-, from the
Greek root glyphein, to carve and theke, a storing-place). Besides its
sculpture collections, the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek also holds a comprehensive
collection of paintings of impressionist and post-impressionist painters such
as Monet,Renoir, CÃ©zanne, van Gogh and Toulouse-Lautrec as well as Danish
Golden Age painters. Loiusiana is an internationally acclaimed museum of
modern art situated on the coast just north of Copenhagen. It is located in
the middle of a sculpture garden on a cliff overlooking Ãresund. The museum
is included in the Patricia Schultz book 1,000 Places to See Before You Die.
The Danish Museum of Art & Design is housed in the 18th century former
Frederiks Hospital and displays Danish design as well as international design
and crafts.

Other museums include:

  * Thorvaldsens Museum is a single-artist museum dedicated to the oeuvre,of romantic Danish sculptor Bertel Thorvaldsen who lived and worked in Rome.
  * Cisternerne is a small but different museum dedicated to modern glass art. It is located in some grotto-like former cisterns that come complete with Stalactites formed by the changing water levels.
  * The Ordrupgaard Museum is an art museum located just north of Copenhagen in an old mansion with an extension by Iraqi-British architect Zaha Hadid. It features 19th century French and Danish art and is particularly noted for its works by Paul Gaugin.

### [edit] Music and entertainment

<IMG>

<IMG>

Copenhagen Opera House

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Royal Danish Theatre

The new Copenhagen Concert Hall opened in January 2009. It is designed by Jean
Nouvel and has four halls with the main auditorium seating 1800 people. It
serves as the home of the Danish National Symphony Orchestra and along with
the Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles the most expensive concert hall
ever built.[58] Another important venue for classical music is the Tivoli
Concert Hall located in the historical Tivoli Gardens. The Copenhagen Opera
House (in Danish usually called Operaen) that opened in 2005 and is designed
by Henning Larsen, is the national opera house of Denmark and among the most
modern opera houses in the world. The old Royal Danish Theatre dating from
1748 still works as a supplementary opera scene. The Royal Danish Theatre is
also home to the Royal Danish Ballet. Founded in 1748 along with the theatre,
it is one of the oldest ballet troups in Europe. It is home to the
Bournonville style of ballet.

Copenhagen has a significant jazz scene that has existed for many years. It
developed when a number of American jazz musicians such as Ben Webster, Thad
Jones, Richard Boone, Ernie Wilkins, Kenny Drew, Ed Thigpen, Bob Rockwell,
Dexter Gordon, and others such as rock guitarist Link Wray came to live in
Copenhagen during the 1960s. Every year in early July Copenhagen's streets,
squares and parks fill up with big and small jazz concerts during the
Copenhagen Jazz Festival (see yearly events). The most important venue for
rhythmical music in Copenhagen is Vega in Vesterbro district which has been
chosen as "best concert venue in Europe" by international music magazine
Live[59]

For free entertainment one can stroll along StrÃ¸get, especially between
Nytorv and HÃ¸jbro Plads, which in the late afternoon and evening is a bit
like an impromptu three-ring circus with musicians, magicians, jugglers and
other street performers.

### [edit] Sports

Copenhagen has a wide variety of sport teams. The two major football teams are
BrÃ¸ndby IF and FC KÃ¸benhavn. BrÃ¸ndby IF plays at BrÃ¸ndby Stadium in
BrÃ¸ndby and FC KÃ¸benhavn plays at Parken in Ãsterbro, Copenhagen. Notable
Copenhagen teams playing at the second highest level in Danish football (the
Danish 1st Division) include Lyngby BK, AB, HIK, Frem, BrÃ¸nshÃ¸j, Fremad
Amager and Skjold.

Copenhagen also has three ice hockey teams: RÃ¸dovre Mighty Bulls, Herlev
Hornets and NordsjÃ¦lland Cobras.

There are a lot of handball teams in Copenhagen. FC KÃ¸benhavn owns both a
women's and a men's team, which have the same name and logo. They were
formerly known as FIF. Of other clubs playing in the "highest" leagues there
are; Ajax Heroes, Ydun, and HIK (Hellerup).

Rugby union is also played in the Danish capital with teams such as CSR-Nanok,
Copenhagen Scrum, Exiles, Froggies and Rugbyklubben Speed.

The Danish Australian Football League, based in Copenhagen is the largest
Australian rules football competition outside of the English speaking world.

Copenhagen is also home to a number of Denmark's 40-odd cricket clubs.
Although Denmark has been an associate member of the International Cricket
Council since 1966, the sport is not taught much in schools, and Danish
cricket competes unfavourably with the much more widely followed sport of
football for players, facilities, media attention and spectators.

The second World Outgames will take place in Copenhagen in 2009, after Berlin
refused to stage them due to the continuing rivalry between the two gay
sporting organisations. It would be the largest such event hosted in
Copenhagen.[citation needed]

### [edit] Amusement parks

Copenhagen has the two oldest amusement parks in the World.[60]

World-famous Tivoli Gardens is an amusement park and pleasure garden located
right in the middle of Copenhagen between the the City Hall Square and the the
Central Station. Among its rides are the oldest still operating roller coaster
and the oldest ferris wheel in the World.[61] It also function as an open-air
concert venue. It opened on August 15 1843 making it the second oldest
amusement park in the world. Dyrehavsbakken (in English "the Deer Garden
Hill") is located in Klampenborg a little north of Copenhagen in a forested
area of great natural beauty. Having been made into an amusement park complete
with rides, games and restaurants by Christian IV, it is the oldest surviving
amusement park in the World.[62]

### [edit] Cuisine

Copenhagen is a centre for the New Nordic Cuisine.[63] In November 2004 a
Nordic Kitchen Symposium was held in Copenhagen at the initiative of Danish
chef Claus Meyer. The symposium had attandance of top chefs from all of the
Nordic countries and led to the adoption of a Manifesto for the New Nordic
Cuisine. [64] Claus Meyer is also the co-founder of the two-Michelin star
Restaurant Noma (Nordisk Madhus) which is a flagship restaurant for the new
Nordic cuisine. In 2008 it was ranked as 10th best in the World by acclaimed
British restaurant & fine dining magazine Restaurant at their 50 Best
Restaurants of the World 2008-list. Furthermore, the users of the
international website TripAdvisor with 25 million users a month rated Noma as
the best restaurant in the world.[65]

As of 2009 Copenhagen boasts a total of 13 Michelin star restaurants. Apart
from Noma they include one of only two Thai restaurants worldwide that has
received a Michelin star. Due to the development, Copenhagen is increasingly
being recognized internationally as a gourmet destination.[66]

Apart from the selection of high end restaurants, Copenhagen offers a great
variety of Danish, International and ethnic restaurants and it is possible to
find modest eateries with open sandwiches (called "smÃ¸rrebrÃ¸d"), which is
the traditional and best known dish for lunch. Most restaurants, though, serve
international dishes. danish pastry, another local specialty, can be sampled
from the numerous bakeries found in all parts of the city.

Copenhagen has long been associated with beer.Carlsberg beer has been brewed
at the brewery's premises at the border between Vesterbro and Valby districts
since 1847 and has long been almost synonumous with Danish beer production.
However, recent years have seen an explosive growth in the number of
microbreweries so that Denmark today has more than 100 breweries[67], many of
which are located in Copenhagen. Some like NÃ¸rrebro Bryghus also act as
brewpubs where it is possible also to eat at the premises. Many cafÃ©s
specialize in a huge selection of quality beers and beer has also become an
important ingredient in the New Nordic Cuisine.

### [edit] Media

Copenhagen is the media centre of Denmark. DR, the major Danish public service
broadcasting corporation collected their activities in a new headquarters, DR
byen, in 2006 and 2007. Similarly has Odense based TV2 collected its
Copenhagen activities in a modern media house in the South Harbour. [68] The
two national daily newspapters Politiken and Berlingske Tidende and the two
tabloids Ekstra Bladet and B. T. are based in Copenhagen. Other important
media corporations include Aller Press which is the largest publisher of
weekly and monthly magazines in Scandinavia, the Egmont media group and
Gyldendal, the largest Danish publisher of books.

Copenhagen also has a sizable movie and television industry. Filmbyen, The
Movie City, which is located in a former military camp in the suburg of
Hvidovre and houses several movie companies and studio studios. Among the
movie campanies are Zentropa co-owned by Danish movie director Lars von Trier
who is behind several international movie productions as well as a founding
force behind the Dogma Movement.

## [edit] Annual events

  * Copenhagen Fashion Week takes place every year in February and August. It is the largest fashion event in Northern Europe.[69][70]

  * Carnival in Copenhagen takes place every year since 1982 during the Whitsun Holiday in FÃ¦lledparken and around the city. 120 bands, 2000 dancers and 100,000 spectators participate.[71]

  * Copenhagen Distortion is a youth culture festival capturing the zeitgeist of the city, gathering every year (5 days up to the first weekend of June) up to 30.000 people in the streets, in shops, galleries, clubs, bars, in boats and buses, with a cultural focus on street culture, art and upfront dance music.[72]

  * Roskilde Festival is a music festival held every year in Roskilde west of Copenhagen. Gathering around 100,000 people every year, it is one of the four largest rock music festivals in Europe.

  * Copenhagen Jazz Festival, which begins on the first Friday in July, is a popular annual event that is the result of Copenhagen's significant jazz scene. The festival takes place throughout the city in streets, squares and parks as well as in cafÃ©s and concert halls.[73] It embraces around 900 concerts, 100 venues and over 200,000 guests from Denmark and around the world. It is recognized as one of the leading jazz festivals in the World.[74][75]

  * Copenhagen Pride is a gay pride festival taking place every year in August. Among the events is "Tivoli goes pink" and it ends with a parade.[76]

  * Copenhagen Cooking takes place in August every year and is a food festival with a wide array of events all over the city.

  * CPH:PIX is Copenhagen's international feature film festival, established in 2009 as a fusion of the 20-year-old Natfilm festival and the 4-year-old CIFF. The CPH:PIX festival takes place in mid-April. [77]

  * CPH:DOX is Copenhagen's international documentary film festival, every year in November. On top of its documentary film programme of over 100 films, CPH:DOX includes a wide event programme with dozens of events, concerts, exhibitions and parties all over town. [78]

## [edit] Economy

<IMG>

<IMG>

Middelgrunden wind farm just off Copenhagen

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Danish National Bank. Designed by Arne Jacobsen.

Copenhagen is the economical and financial centre of Denmark[79] and also a
strong business and economic centre in the Scandinavian-Baltic region. In
2008, Copenhagen was ranked 4th by Financial Times-owned FDi magazine on their
list of Top50 European Cities of the Future after London, Paris and
Berlin.[80] In 2006/07 FDi Magazine named Copenhagen Scandinavian City of the
Future[81] and in 2004/05 Copenhagen was named Northern European City of the
Future ahead of other cities from Scandinavia, UK, Ireland and Benelux.[82] In
the 2008 Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index, published by MasterCard,
Copenhagen was ranked 14th in the world and 1st in Scandinavia.[83] Copenhagen
is one of the cities in Western Europe attracting most regional headquarters
and distribution centers.[84] Among the international companies that have
chosen to locate their regional headquarters in Copenhagen is Microsoft.There
are 2,100 foreign companies located in the Copenhagen area, of which approx.
500 are Scandinavian head offices, representing a wide range of industries.

Copenhagen has a service oriented economy. An important sector is life science
and research & development plays a major role in the economy of the city. The
entire Oresund Region is in cooperation with Sweden being promoted as Medicon
Valley. Major Danish biotech companies like Novo Nordisk and Lundbeck, both of
which are among 50 largest pharmaceutical and biotech companies in the World,
are located in the greater Copenhagen area.[85] The region also boasts the
largest IT-cluster in Scandinavia with nearly 100,000 employees and the city
of Copenhagen is home to Nokia's largest research centre outside Finland. [86]
Shipping is also an import business with Maersk, the World's largest shipping
company, having their world headquarters in Copenhagen.

Several international companies have established their regional headquarters
in Copenhagen, e.g. Microsoft. Maersk, the world's largest container shipping
company, has their world headquarters in Copenhagen. A substantial number of
Danish pharmaceuticals such as Novo Nordisk, Ferring Pharmaceuticals and
Bavarian Nordic also operate in the area, having placed their headquarters in
or close to Copenhagen.[87]

Copenhagen has some of the highest gross wages in the World.[88] High taxes
mean that wages are reduced after mandatory deduction. A beneficial researcher
scheme with low taxation of foreigh specialists[89] has made Denmark an
attractive location for highly educated foreign labour to settle. Copenhagen
is however also among the most expensive cities in Europe.[90][91]

## [edit] Education, science, research

<IMG>

<IMG>

Copenhagen University

Copenhagen has a well-developed higher education system of public
universities. Most prominent among these is the University of Copenhagen.
Founded in 1479, it is the oldest university in Denmark. It is a world-
renowned research and teaching institution with campuses around the city and
forms part of the International Alliance of Research Universities (IARU),
which is a collaboration between international top universities including
Oxford, Cambridge, Yale and Berkeley. The University attracts app. 1500
international and exchange students every year.[92] It is repeatedly ranked as
one of the best universities in Europe. At the Times Higher Education's QS
World University Rankings 2008 list, it was ranked as fourth best in
continental Europe.[93] TheAcademic Ranking of World Universities 2008 placesd
it as number 43 worldwide and 8th in Europe.[94] A second all-round university
in the Copenhagen area is Roskilde University located in Roskilde.

The Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, is
located in Lyngby at the northern outskirts of Copenhagen. In 2008 it was
ranked third highest in Europe on Times Higher Education's list of the most
influential technical universities in the World. The Max Planck Institute in
Germany was ranked 15, ETH Zurich in Switzerland was ranked 15 and DTU in
Denmark was ranked 20.[95]

Copenhagen Business School (CBS) is an esteemed and EQUIS accredited business
school located on Frederiksberg.

### [edit] Medicon Valley

Copenhagen is rich in companies and institutions with a focus on research and
development within the biotechnology[96] and life science sectors. Two of the
50 largest pharmaceutical and biotech companies in the World are located in
the greater Copenhagen area. The biotech and life science cluster in
Copenhagen and the rest of the Oresund Region is one of the strongest in
Europe. Since 1995 this has been branded as the Medicon Valley in a Danish-
Swedish cooperation. The aim is to strengthen the region's position and to
promote cooperation between companies and academia. The German biotech giant
Sartorius Stedim Biotech, which is currently creating a Nordic head office in
TÃ¥strup on the outskirts of Copenhagen. The Ãresund region is responsible
for 60 percent of life science production in Scandinavia and is home to 111
biotech companies.[97]

### [edit] Cleantech

Copenhagen was mentioned by Clean Edge as as one of the key cleantech clusters
to watch in their 2008 book The Cleantech Revolution. The city is the focal
point for more than 300 cleantech companies drawing on 46 research
institutions. The cluster employs more than 60.000 people and is characterized
by a close collaboration between universities, business and governing
institutions. The regions most important cleantech resaerch institutions are
the University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen Business School,[98] RisÃ¸ DTU
National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy and the Technical University of
Denmark which RisÃ¸ is now part of. Leading up to the 2009 United Nations
Climate Change Conference the University of Copenhagen held the Climate
Change: Global Risks, Challenges and Decisions conference where the need for
comprehensive action to mitigate climate change was stressed by the
international scientific community. Notable figures such as Rajendra K.
Pachauri, Chairman of the IPCC, Professor Nicholas Stern, author of the Stern
Report and Professor Daniel Kammen all emphasized the good example set by
Copenhagen in capitalizing on cleantech, achieving economic growth, with
stabilizing carbon emissions. (see "Environment" below).

## [edit] Transport

The greater Copenhagen area has a very well established transportation
infrastructure making it a hub in Northern Europe.

### [edit] Roads

Copenhagen has a large network of toll-free highways and public roads
connecting different municipalities of the city together and to Northern
Europe.[99] As in many other cities in Europe traffic is increasing in
Copenhagen. The radial arterial roads and highways leading to the Copenhagen
city center are critically congested during peak hours.[100]

### [edit] Bicycling

Copenhagen is known as one of the most bicycle-friendly cities in the
world.[101] Every day 1,1 million km are bicycled in Copenhagen.[102] 36 % of
all citizens commute to work, school or university by bicycle[103] and it is
municipal policy that this number should go up to 40 % by 2012 and 50 % in
2015.[104]

The city's bicycle paths are extensive and well-used. Bicycle paths are often
separated from the main traffic lanes and sometimes have their own signal
systems.

The municipality is also developing a system of interconnected green bicycle
routes, greenways, with the aim to facilitate fast, safe and pleasant bicycle
transport from one end of the city to the other. The network will cover more
than 100 km and consist of 22 routes when finished.[105]

The city provides public bicycles which can be found throughout the downtown
area and used with a returnable deposit of 20 kroner.

Copenhagen's well-developed bicycle culture has given rise to the term
âcopenhagenizeâ. This is the practice of other cities adopting Copenhagen-
style bike lanes and bicycle infrastructure.[106] In 2007 Copenhagen-based
Danish urban design consultant Jan Gehl was hired by the New York City
Department of Transportation to re-imagine New York City streets by
introducing designs to improve life for pedestrians and cyclists.[107]

In recognition of Copenhagen's emphasis on bicycling, the city has been chosen
by the Union Cycliste Internationale as their first official Bike City. Bike
City Copenhagen will take place from 2008 to 2011 and consist of big cycling
events for professionals as well as amateurs.[108]

### [edit] Harbour

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Little Mermaid statue in Copenhagen harbour

The harbour of Copenhagen has largely lost its importance as an industrial
harbour. In 2001 Copenhagen Harbour merged with the harbour in MalmÃ¶ to
create Copenhagen-MalmÃ¶ Port. It has several functions, the most important
being as a major cruise destination. In 2007 a record 286 cruise ships with
420,000 cruise passengers visited Copenhagen. 120 of these ships either
started or ended the cruise in Copenhagen.[109] In 2008 these numbers grew
further to 310 cruise ships and 560,000 passengers.[110] As a result of the
growth in the cruise industry facilities are being expanded and improved.[111]
At the World Travel Awards in 2008, Copenhagen Port was named the number one
cruise destination in Europe for the fifth year in a row.[112]

Copenhagen is serviced by ferry lines to Oslo in Norway (called "OslobÃ¥den")
with a daily connection[113] and to ÅwinoujÅcie in Poland (called
"PolensfÃ¦rgerne") with five weekly connections.[114]

### [edit] Airports

Copenhagen Airport is the principal airport serving Copenhagen. It is the
largest in Scandinavia and the 17th largest in Europe.[115] It is located in
Kastrup on the island of Amager and has very efficient connections to downtown
Copenhagen with metro trains going to Kongens Nytorv in 15 minutes with 4â6
minutes between departures and regional trains going to the Central Station in
12 minutes. Its location also makes it the most important international
airport for large parts of southern Sweden. Over the Ãresund Bridge trains go
to MalmÃ¶ South in 14 minutes or MalmÃ¶ Central Station in 22 minutes.[116]
Copenhagen Airport has won the award as "The best airport in Europe" four
times, and as "The best airport in the world" two times. Copenhagen Airport is
the seventh best airport in the world - second best in Europe - when you ask
the passengers. The British organization Skytrax is doing so every year,
writes the airport in a press release. 40 criteria are employed for the
ranking.[117]

### [edit] Public transportation

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Metro

<IMG>

<IMG>

S-train at NÃ¸rreport

<IMG>

<IMG>

Metro entrance in Frederiksberg

The public transportation system of Copenhagen consists of commuter trains
(called S-trains, S-tog), buses, and a metro. The S-trains form the basis of
the transportation network, stretching to most areas of metropolitan
Copenhagen, with their main hub at Copenhagen Central Station (KÃ¸benhavn H).
Regional trains supplement the S-train services with lines extending further
such as to the Copenhagen Airport, Elsinore, and MalmÃ¶. The Danish State
Railways' Intercity network has its eastern terminus and main hub at
Copenhagen, with most trains extending to Copenhagen Airport.

The fare system is based on 95 zones covering the capital area. Tickets are
transferable from one means of transport to another within a time limit. The
more zones a ticket is valid for, the longer its time validity with a maximum
of two hours. Discount cards (punch cards, klippekort) and period cards are
available. Ticket prices are high and have increased substantially in recent
years leading to a decrease in passenger numbers.[citation needed] In fact,
the percentage of trips made on public transportation in Copenhagen is quite
low by northern European standards.[citation needed]

The Copenhagen Metro began operation in 2002 and currently has only two lines.
In April 2008, it was named Best Metro in the World by industry experts.[118]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Christiansborg Palace - home of the Danish Parliament Folketinget, the Supreme
Court, Office of the Prime Minister and official reception area of Queen
Margrethe II  
<IMG>

<IMG>

BÃ¸rsen \- the Stock Exchange building  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Nyhavn  
<IMG>

<IMG>

The Marble Church  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Rosenborg Castle in central Copenhagen  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Christianshavns Canal  
<IMG>

<IMG>

The Tivoli, photographed from Eduard Spelterini's balloon on June 22, 1922  
## [edit] Environment

Copenhagen is recognized as one of the most environmentally friendly cities in
the world.[119] In 2006 Copenhagen Municipality received the European
Environmental Management Award.[120] The award was given for long-term
holistic environmental planning. It is municipal policy to reduce CO2
emissions by 20% before the end of 2015.[121] In 2001 a large offshore wind
farm was built just off the coast of Copenhagen at Middelgrunden. It produces
about 4 % of the city's energy.[122]

Many years of major investments in sewage treatment has improved water quality
in the harbour to an extent that the inner harbour can be used for swimming
and facilities for this are provided at a number of locations.[123]

Another municipal policy is that 40% of all citizens should bicycle to and
from work by 2012 and a number of initiatives are being taken to implement
this policy (see "bicycling above").[124]

Copenhagen is the capital in the World where organic food has the largest
market share. One in every ten purchases is organic in Copenhagen.[125] Within
the municipal sector in Copenhagen, 45 % of all food consumption is organic
but the target is considerably higher. With the environmental strategy
"Environment Metropolis: Our Vision 2015" the politicians wish that solely
organic food is to be served in 90 per cent of the Copenhagen old-age homes
and residential homes for children and young persons in 2015.[126]

## [edit] Copenhagen in international rankings

Copenhagen is a major regional center of culture, business, journalism, media,
and science. In 2008 Copenhagen was ranked #4 by Financial Times-owned FDi
magazine on their list of Top50 European Cities of the Future after London,
Paris and Berlin.[122] In the 2008 Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index,
published by MasterCard, Copenhagen was ranked 14th in the world and 1st in
Scandinavia.[123] Life science, information technology and shipping are
important sectors and research & development plays a major role in the city's
economy. Its strategic location and excellent infrastructure with the largest
airport in Scandinavia[124] located 14 minutes by train from the city centre,
has made it a regional hub and a popular location for regional
headquarters[125] as well as conventions.

Copenhagen has placed well in a number of international rankings, some of
which are mentioned below.

  * Copenhagen was ranked #1 as Most Livable City in the World by international lifestyle magazine Monocle on their Top 25 Most Livable Cities 2008 list[127]
  * Worlds Best Design City 2008 also by Monocle.[127]
  * Copenhagen ranked #4 by Financial Times-owned FDi magazine on their list of Top50 European Cities of the Future after London, Paris and Berlin.[128] In 2006/07 FDi Magazine named Copenhagen Scandinavian City of the Future[129] and in 2004/05 Copenhagen was named Northern European City of the Future ahead of other cities from Scandinavia, UK, Ireland and Benelux.[130]
  * In the 2008 Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index, published by MasterCard, Copenhagen was ranked 14th in the world and 1st in Scandinavia.[83]
  * Copenhagen #1 out of 254 locations in the Location Ranking Survey performed by ECA International that has asked European experts where they prefer to be stationed worldwide.[131]
  * Copenhagen was ranked #6 in Grist Magazine's "15 Green Cities" list in 2007 making Copenhagen the greenest capital of Scandinavia according to Grist Magazine.[132]
  * Copenhagen is the capital in the World where organic food has the largest market share. One in every ten purchases is organic in Copenhagen.[133]
  * The Copenhagen Metro has been named the Best Metro in the World by industry experts.[134]
  * Copenhagen is the worlds #7 most expensive city and #3 most expensive in Europe on the Forbes List.[135]
  * Copenhagen is ranked #7 as Preferred City For Investment Projects.[136]
  * Copenhagen ranked 3rd in Western Europe in terms of attracting regional headquarters and distribution centers, only surpassed by London and Paris.[84]
  * Copenhagen ranks #1 in the Global Earning Ranking.[137]
  * Copenhagen ranks as the 5th most popular city in the world for international meetings and conferences.[138]
  * Copenhagen ranks as one of the most attractive cities to live and work in Europe.[139]
  * Copenhagen ranks 2nd in Europe for Quality of life according to a survey from 2005 by the international consultancy firm William Mercer.[140]
  * Lonely Planet ranks Copenhagen as Scandinavia's ' coolest ' capital .[citations needed]

## [edit] Twin towns - Sister cities

Copenhagen is twinned with:

  * Flag of France Paris in France (partner city)
  * Flag of Iceland ReykjavÃ­k in Iceland
  * Flag of the Czech Republic Prague in Czech Republic (unofficial partner city)
  * Flag of Mexico San Francisco de Campeche in Mexico

## [edit] See also

Find more about Copenhagen on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG> Definitions
from Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

  * Oresund Region
  * Eurovision Song Contest 2001
  * Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2003
  * MTV Europe Music Awards 2006
  * Transportation in Denmark
  * Ports of the Baltic Sea

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Region Hovedstaden" (in Danish). Region Hovedstaden. http://www.regionhovedstaden.dk/. Retrieved on 2008-11-12.
  2. ^ Copenhagen Area
  3. ^ General facts on The Ãresund Region
  4. ^ or alternatively: kÉÊpÉnËhÉËgÉn, ËkÉÊpÉnËheÉªgÉn, ËkÉÊpÉnËhÉËgÉn
  5. ^ Alternatively: kÊ°Ã¸bÌ¥mÌ©ËhÉÊÌ¯Ën
  6. ^ Top 150 City Destinations: London Leads the Way
  7. ^ "Top 50 European City of the Future 2008/09". FDi magazine. http://www.fdimagazine.com/cp/10/FDI_052-055_0208-2.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  8. ^ "Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index". MasterCard. http://www.mastercard.com/us/company/en/insights/pdfs/2008/MCWW_WCoC-Report_2008.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  9. ^ "Copenhagen Airport". waymarking.com. http://www.waymarking.com/waymarks/WM3N4X. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  10. ^ "COPENHAGEN REGION RANKS 3RD IN WESTERN EUROPE FOR ATTRACTING HEAD OFFICES". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark. http://www.ambottawa.um.dk/en/servicemenu/News/Copenhagen+region+ranks+3rd+in+western+EuropeForAttractingHeadOffices.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  11. ^ "A great place to live". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark. http://www.investindk.com/visArtikel.asp?artikelID=8130. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  12. ^ "Copenhagen is Scandinavia's most desirable city". International Harrold Tribune. http://www.iht.com/articles/2007/06/18/arts/rmon2copenhagen.php. Retrieved on 2009-01-09.
  13. ^ "Europe's 10 Best Places To Live". Forbes. http://www.forbes.com/2008/07/21/cities-europe-lifestyle-forbeslife-cx_vr_0721europe.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  14. ^ "Copenhagen". Monocle. http://www.monocle.com/sections/edits/Web-Articles/Copenhagen/. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  15. ^ "Cool Boom Towns". Spiegel Special. http://wissen.spiegel.de/wissen/image/show.html?did=57570816&aref=image037/2008/06/21/ROSPC200800400660071.PDF&thumb=false. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  16. ^ "Copenhagen is Scandinavia's most desirable city". International Harald Tribune. http://www.iht.com/articles/2007/06/18/arts/rmon2copenhagen.php. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  17. ^ ArkÃ¦ologer graver ny teori om KÃ¸benhavn op af mulden (Archeologists develop new theory about Copenhagen from their digs), Videnskab.dk, 5 November 2008
  18. ^ Biography of George de Hevesy
  19. ^ a b c Statistics Denmark, table BEF1A07: Population 1 January by region, age, sex, marital status Retrieved on 2008-03-26.
  20. ^ a b c Statistics Denmark, definitions of lands as of 2007-01-01 (excel-file, in danish) Retrieved on 2008-03-26.
  21. ^ The Finger Plan, Denmark.dk
  22. ^ "Weather Information for Copenhagen". World Weather Information Service]. http://weather.msn.com/monthly_averages.aspx?wealocations=wc:DAXX0009&q=Copenhagen%2c+DNK+forecast:averagesm. Retrieved on 6 January 2008.
  23. ^ "B1 Kopenhagen entdecken". Baumeister - Zeitschrift fÃ¼r Architektur. http://www.baumeister.de/. Retrieved on 2009-01-23.
  24. ^ "Elephant House at Copenhagen Zoo by Foster + Partners". Dezeen. http://www.dezeen.com/2008/06/11/elephant-house-at-copenhagen-zoo-by-foster-partners/. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  25. ^ "Ordrupgaard Art Museum by Zaha Hadid". archiDE. http://archide.wordpress.com/2008/11/10/ordrupgaard-art-museum-by-zaha-hadid-copenhagen-denmark/l. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  26. ^ "Copenhagen Concert Hall by Jean Nouvel". e-architect. http://www.e-architect.co.uk/copenhagen/dr_byen.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  27. ^ "Ãrestad Downtown". Copenhagen X. http://www.cphx.dk/index.php?language=dk&id=37934#/37934/. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  28. ^ "RIBA European Awards 2005". RIBA. http://www.e-architect.co.uk/awards/riba_awards_2005.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  29. ^ "RIBA European Awards 2006". RIBA. http://www.architecture.com/Awards/RIBAEuropeanAwards/2006/Kilen/KilenDenmark.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  30. ^ "RIBA European Awards 2007". RIBA. http://www.amblondon.um.dk/en/menu/TheEmbassy/News/RIBAAwardsToDanishArchitects.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  31. ^ "RIBA European Awards 2009". RIBA. http://www.architecture.com/Awards/RIBAEuropeanAwards/2008/RoyalPlayhouse.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  32. ^ "World's Best Residential Building 2008". World Architecture Festival. http://www.worldarchitecturefestival.com/news-detail.cfm?newsId=33. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  33. ^ "Controversial residential housing complex yearâs best building". Forum AID. http://www.forumaid.com/default.asp?sid=1207. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  34. ^ "Ãrestad Gymnasium Best Building in Scandinavia 2008". designboom. http://www.designboom.com/weblog/read.php?CATEGORY_PK=&TOPIC_PK=2388. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  35. ^ "World's best design city 2008". The Independent. http://www.independent.co.uk/travel/news-and-advice/copenhagen-probably-the-best-city-in-the-world-842782.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  36. ^ "King's Garden". Slots- og Ejeondomsstyrelsen. http://www.ses.dk/392755f0. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  37. ^ "Kongens Have". AOK. http://www.aok.dk/byen-rundt/kongens-have. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  38. ^ "King's Garden". Slots- og Ejeondomsstyrelsen. http://www.ses.dk/392755f0. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  39. ^ "Botanisk Have". Carlsberg. http://www.carlsbergdanmark.dk/omos/Historie/IJacobsensfodspor/Kobenhavn/Pages/BotaniskHave.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  40. ^ "FÃ¦lledparken". AOK. http://www.aok.dk/byen-rundt/faelledparken. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  41. ^ "KÃ¸benhavn fÃ¥r mere liv pÃ¥ kirkegÃ¥rdene". Politiken. http://ibyen.dk/article241086.ece. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  42. ^ "Guide: GÃ¥ pÃ¥ opdagelse i de dÃ¸des haver". Politiken. http://ibyen.dk/guide/article327680.ece. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  43. ^ "En grÃ¸n og blÃ¥ storby". KÃ¸benhavns Kommune. http://www.br.kk.dk/Politik%20og%20Demokrati/IPolitiskFokus/Miljoemetropolen/EnGronOgBlaaStorby.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  44. ^ "Superkilen by Bjarke Ingels Group". Dezeen. http://www.dezeen.com/2008/10/05/suk-project-by-big-architects/. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  45. ^ ""1001 TrÃ¦", Nordvest". KÃ¸benhavns Kommune. http://www2.kk.dk/kvarterloeft/pegasus.nsf/url/nordvest. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  46. ^ "Hot spot pÃ¥ Amager Strandpark". gomotion.dk. http://www.gomotion.dk/pe1.asp?p_id=335. Retrieved on 2009-01-14.
  47. ^ Harbour bath at Islands Brygge, e-architect
  48. ^ "2007 IOC Honorable Mention". ap architecture-page. http://www.architecture-page.com/go/people/profiles/bjarke-ingels-group. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  49. ^ [1]Largest cities of Denmark 2007
  50. ^ Statistikbanken.dk Population table BEF1A07
  51. ^ Orienteering fra KÃ¸benhavns Kommune. Statistisk Kontor.2003 nr. 25
  52. ^ Andel af befolkningen der pendler til den centrale del a HUR-omrÃ¥det
  53. ^ DR netnews 25-06-04
  54. ^ "Cool Boom Towns". Spiegel Special. http://wissen.spiegel.de/wissen/image/show.html?did=57570816&aref=image037/2008/06/21/ROSPC200800400660071.PDF&thumb=false. Retrieved on 2009-01-09.
  55. ^ "Copenhagen is Scandinavia's most desirable city". International Harrold Tribune. http://www.iht.com/articles/2007/06/18/arts/rmon2copenhagen.php. Retrieved on 2009-01-09.
  56. ^ "B1 Kopenhagen entdecken". Baumeister - Zeitschrift fÃ¼r Architektur. http://www.baumeister.de/. Retrieved on 2009-01-23.
  57. ^ "Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek". AOK. http://www.aok.dk/udstilling/ny-carlsberg-glyptotek. Retrieved on 2009-01-09.
  58. ^ "DRs koncerthus - et af verdens dyreste". Berlingske Tidende. http://www.berlingske.dk/article/20070209/danmark/102090998/. Retrieved on 2009-01-09.
  59. ^ "VEGA". Wonderfull Copenhagen. http://www.visitcopenhagen.dk/presse/presseinformation/gaa_ud/vega_-_koncertsted_og_natklub. Retrieved on 2009-01-09.
  60. ^ "Dyrehavsbakken". AOK. http://www.aok.dk/byen-rundt/bakken. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  61. ^ Tivoli Gardens, the rides
  62. ^ "Dyrehavsbakken". AOK. http://www.aok.dk/byen-rundt/bakken. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  63. ^ Nordic Cuisine, New York Times
  64. ^ Manifesto for a New Nordic Cuisine
  65. ^ TripAdvisor ranking
  66. ^ The Top 10 cities to visit in 2009, TimesOnline
  67. ^ Nyeste artikler fra Bryggeriforeningen, Bryggeriforeningen
  68. ^ "TV2 samles pÃ¥ Teglholmen". Berlingske Tidende. http://www.business.dk/article/20060515/nyhedsoversigt/105150198/. Retrieved on 2009-01-10.
  69. ^ Fashion Capital Copenhagen
  70. ^ Copenhagen Fashion Week
  71. ^ History of Copenhagen
  72. ^ Copenhagen Distortion
  73. ^ Copenhagen Jazz Festival 3+ years, Wonderful Copenhagen
  74. ^ Top 10 best Jazz Festivals, TripAdvisor
  75. ^ Copenhagen Jazz Festival
  76. ^ Copenhagen Pride
  77. ^ [2]
  78. ^ [3]
  79. ^ Regionale regnskaber 2005 - Nyt fra Danmarks Statistik - Danmarks Statistik
  80. ^ Top 50 European City of the Future 2008/09
  81. ^ Scandinavian City of the Future 06/07
  82. ^ Northern European City of the Future 2004/05
  83. ^ a b (PDF)Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index. MasterCard. 2008. http://www.mastercard.com/us/company/en/insights/pdfs/2008/MCWW_WCoC-Report_2008.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-11-24.
  84. ^ a b "COPENHAGEN REGION RANKS 3RD IN WESTERN EUROPE FOR ATTRACTING HEAD OFFICES", Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark, 2008-08-05, http://www.ambottawa.um.dk/en/servicemenu/News/Copenhagen+region+ranks+3rd+in+western+EuropeForAttractingHeadOffices.htm
  85. ^ USATODAY.com
  86. ^ Copenhagen - Overview
  87. ^ USATODAY.com
  88. ^ City Mayors: World's richest cities
  89. ^ Level of salary in Denmark
  90. ^ City Mayors: World's most expensive cities (EIU)
  91. ^ City Mayors: World's most expensive cities - Ranking
  92. ^ "Internationalisation â University of Copenhagen". University of Copenhagen. http://facts.ku.dk/studerende/h_internationalisering/. Retrieved on 2009-01-10.
  93. ^ "THE - QS World University Rankings 2008". Times Higher Education Supplement. http://www.topuniversities.com/worlduniversityrankings/results/2008/overall_rankings/fullrankings/. Retrieved on 2009-01-10.
  94. ^ "Top500 World Universities". Academic Ranking of World Universities. http://www.arwu.org/rank2008/ARWU2008_A(EN).htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-10.
  95. ^ "Top 20 institutions in engineering based on impact". Times Higher Education Supplement. http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?sectioncode=26&storycode=401979&c=1. Retrieved on 2009-01-10.
  96. ^ [4] , Infrastructure & logistics - Copenhagen a distribution hub, retrieved February 22, 2007.
  97. ^ "Top 20 institutions in engineering based on impact". usatoday.com. http://www.usatoday.com/marketplace/ibi/copenhagen.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-10.
  98. ^ "The win-win ways of Cleantech business". CBS Observer. March 26 2009. http://cbsobserver.dk/win-win-ways-cleantech-business.
  99. ^ "Logistics". Copenhagen Capacity. http://www.copcap.com/content/us/doing_business/facts/infrastructure_and_logistics/logistics. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  100. ^ "Light rail project in Copenhagen â the Ring 2Â½ corridor". Centre for Traffic and Transport, DTU. http://www.trafikdage.dk/td/papers/papers06/Trafikdage-2006-556.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  101. ^ "11 most bicycle-friendly cities in the world". Virgin vaccations. http://www.virgin-vacations.com/site_vv/11-most-bike-friendly-cities.asp. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  102. ^ "Verdens bedste cykelby". KÃ¸benhavns Kommune. http://www.kk.dk/Borger/ByOgTrafik/cyklernesby.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  103. ^ "Bike City Copenhagen". KÃ¸benhavns Kommune. http://www.visitcopenhagen.com/content/tourist/what_to_see_and_do/events/event_calendar/major_event_-_information?EventID=590. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  104. ^ "GrÃ¸nne cykel router". KÃ¸benhavns Kommune. http://www.kk.dk/Borger/ByOgTrafik/cyklernesby/groennecykelruter.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  105. ^ "GrÃ¸nne cykel router". KÃ¸benhavns Kommune. http://www.kk.dk/Borger/ByOgTrafik/cyklernesby/groennecykelruter.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  106. ^ "Media Release: Copenhagen Comes To Swanston Street". Press release. http://www.legislation.vic.gov.au/domino/Web_Notes/newmedia.nsf/b0222c68d27626e2ca256c8c001a3d2d/6755f8108f4ff605ca2570700001e087!OpenDocument. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  107. ^ "Danske cykelstier i New Yrok". DR Online. http://www.dr.dk/Nyheder/Penge/2007/10/05/064448.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  108. ^ "Bike City Copenhagen". KÃ¸benhavns Kommune. http://www.visitcopenhagen.com/content/tourist/what_to_see_and_do/events/event_calendar/major_event_-_information?EventID=590. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  109. ^ "Ny rekord i 2007: 286 krydstogtskibe til KÃ¸benhavn". Wonderful Copenhagen. http://www.trafikdage.dk/td/papers/papers06/Trafikdage-2006-556.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  110. ^ "Cruise Season 2008: New companies and larger ships". Wonderful Copenhagen. http://www.cruisecopenhagen.com/cruise_copenhagen/cruise_media/press_releases/cruise_season_2008:_new_companies_and_larger_ships. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  111. ^ "Copenhagen invests in continued cruise success". Wonderful Copenhagen. http://www.cruisecopenhagen.com/content/cruise_copenhagen/cruise_media/press_releases/copenhagen_invests_in_continued_cruise_success. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  112. ^ "KÃ¸benhavn har Europas bedste havn". ErhvervsBladet. http://www.erhvervsbladet.dk/article/20081016/news06/81016090/. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  113. ^ "DFDS Seaways". AOK. http://www.aok.dk/byen-rundt/dfds-seaways. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  114. ^ "PolensfÃ¦rgerne, KÃ¸benhavn". Polferries. http://www.dentour.dk/polensfaergen_koebenhavn_swinoujscie.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  115. ^ "Copenhagen Airport". waymarking.com. http://www.waymarking.com/waymarks/WM3N4X. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  116. ^ "Airport". malmo.com. http://www.malmo.com/a_z/a_z.asp?ViewAlpha=A. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  117. ^ "The Top 10 Airports in the world for 2008". Skytrax. http://www.worldairportawards.com/Awards_2008/Airport2008.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-06.
  118. ^ Copenhagen Metro Best in the World
  119. ^ "15 green cities". grist. http://grist.org/news/maindish/2007/07/19/cities/. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  120. ^ "Copenhagen Receives European Environmental Award". grist. http://www.dhigroup.com/News/NewsArchive/2006/CopenhagenReceivesEuropeanEnvironmentalAward.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  121. ^ "street lights in Copenhagen". KÃ¸benhavns Kommune. http://www.kk.dk/vejpark.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  122. ^ "Environmental Capital of Europe". Copenhagen, Environmental Capital of Europe. http://www.cece.dk/EE0911AA-D9A1-49E8-9CA2-332E37BBA568. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  123. ^ "Copenhagen: From sewer to harbour bath". Sustainable Cities. http://sustainablecities.dk/city-projects/cases/copenhagen-from-sewer-to-harbour-bath. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  124. ^ "Bicycle transport". KÃ¸benhavns Kommune. http://www.vejsektoren.dk/wimpnews.asp?page=document&objno=132538. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  125. ^ "World-champinions in organic food". Copenhagen Capacity. http://www.copcap.com/content/us/quick_links/news/latest_news/news_archive_from_old_site/copenhagen_world_champion_in_organic_foods. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  126. ^ "World-champinions in organic food". Copenhagen Capacity. http://www.copcap.com/content/us/quick_links/news/latest_news/news_archive_from_old_site/copenhagen_world_champion_in_organic_foods. Retrieved on 2009-01-05.
  127. ^ a b Monocles page on Copenhagen
  128. ^ Top 50 European City of the Future 2008/09
  129. ^ Scandinavian City of the Future 06/07
  130. ^ Northern European City of the Future 2004/05
  131. ^ Location Ranking Survey
  132. ^ 15 Green Cities | Grist | Main Dish | 19 July 2007
  133. ^ World-champinions in organic food
  134. ^ Copenhagen Metro Best in the World
  135. ^ Forbes-Worlds Most Expensive Cities List
  136. ^ Preferred City For Investment Projects
  137. ^ Global earning ranking
  138. ^ Style & Substance Danmark
  139. ^ A great place to live
  140. ^ A great place to live

## [edit] External links

  * Copenhagen Portal - Copenhagen Tourist Site and Cultural Guide
  * Official municipal website
  * Copenhagen official tourism website
  * Copenhagen Capacity official investment agency of Copenhagen
  * Copenhagen travel guide from Wikitravel

v â¢ d â¢ e

30 most populous cities of Denmark  
as of 1 January 2008, according to Statistics Denmark [5]  
1. Copenhagen 1,153,615  
2. Ã rhus 237,551  
3. Odense 158,163  
4. Aalborg 121,818  
5. Esbjerg 70,880  
6. Randers 59,565  
7. Kolding 55,596  
8. Horsens 51,670  
9. Vejle 50,213  
10. Roskilde 45,824  
11. Herning 44,763  
12. NÃ¦stved 41,810  
13. Silkeborg 41,674  
14. Fredericia 39,391  
15. Viborg 34,831  
16. KÃ¸ge 34,792  
17. HelsingÃ¸r 34,350  
18. Holstebro 33,939  
19. HÃ¸rsholm 32,886  
20. Taastrup 31,917  
21. Slagelse 31,879  
22. HillerÃ¸d 29,296  
23. Svendborg 27,318  
24. SÃ¸nderborg 27,286  
25. HolbÃ¦k 26,267  
26. HjÃ¸rring 24,815  
27. Frederikshavn 23,551  
28. Haderslev 21,279  
29. Skive 20,643  
30. Ringsted 20,188  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Capital cities of the Member States of the European Union  
Amsterdam Â· Athens Â· Berlin Â· Bratislava Â· Brussels Â· Bucharest Â·
Budapest Â· Copenhagen Â· Dublin Â· Helsinki Â· Lisbon Â· Ljubljana Â· London
Â· Luxembourg City Â· Madrid Â· Nicosia Â· Paris Â· Prague Â· Riga Â· Rome Â·
Sofia Â· Stockholm Â· Tallinn Â· Valletta Â· Vienna Â· Vilnius Â· Warsaw  
v â¢ d â¢ e

European Capitals of Culture  
1985 Athens Â· 1986 Florence Â· 1987 Amsterdam Â· 1988 West Berlin Â· 1989
Paris Â· 1990 Glasgow Â· 1991 Dublin Â· 1992 Madrid Â· 1993 Antwerp Â· 1994
Lisbon Â· 1995 Luxembourg City Â· 1996 Copenhagen Â· 1997 Thessaloniki Â· 1998
Stockholm Â· 1999 Weimar Â· 2000 ReykjavÃ­k Â· Bergen Â· Helsinki Â· Brussels
Â· Prague Â· KrakÃ³w Â· Santiago de Compostela Â· Avignon Â· Bologna Â· 2001
Rotterdam Â· Porto Â· 2002 Bruges Â· Salamanca Â· 2003 Graz Â· 2004 Genoa Â·
Lille Â· 2005 Cork Â· 2006 Patras Â· 2007 Luxembourg City and Greater Region
Â· Sibiu Â· 2008 Liverpool Â· Stavanger Â· 2009 Linz Â· Vilnius Â· 2010 Essen
Â· PÃ©cs Â· Istanbul Â· 2011 Turku Â· Tallinn Â· 2012 Maribor Â· GuimarÃ£es  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copenhagen"

Categories: Copenhagen | Settlements established in the 11th century |
Capitals in Europe | Port cities and towns in Denmark | Port cities and towns
of the Baltic Sea

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | All articles
with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March
2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Articles with
unsourced statements since June 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * á áá­á
  * Anglo-Saxon
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * ÜÜªÜ¡ÜÜ
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * à½à½¼à½à¼à½¡à½²à½
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FÃ¸royskt
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Gaeilge
  * Gaelg
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * ÐÑÐ¾Ð½Ð°Ñ
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Kalaallisut
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * KaszÃ«bsczi
  * Kernewek
  * Kiswahili
  * ÐÐ¾Ð¼Ð¸
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LÃ­guru
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * NÄhuatl
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Nnapulitano
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Novial
  * Occitan
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡Ð°Ñ Ð° ÑÑÐ»Ð°
  * SÃ¡megiella
  * à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¥à¤à¥à¤¤
  * Sardu
  * Seeltersk
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * ÅlÅ¯nski
  * Soomaaliga
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * VÃ¨neto
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * VolapÃ¼k
  * Winaray
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ç²µèª
  * Zazaki
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 20:50.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



