
# Israel

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the country. For other uses, see Israel
(disambiguation).

Semi-protected

Featured article

×Ö°×Ö´×× Ö·×ª ×Ö´×©Ö°××¨Ö¸×Öµ×â  
MedÄ«nat YisrÄ'el Ø¯ÙÙÙÙÙØ©Ù Ø¥ÙØ³ÙØ±ÙØ§Ø¦ÙÙÙÙâ  
Dawlat IsrÄ'Ä«l  
State of Israel  
Flag of Israel Emblem of Israel  
Flag Emblem  
Anthem: Hatikvah  
The Hope  
  
Location of Israel  
Capital  
(and largest city) Jerusalem[1]  
31Â°47â²N 35Â°13â²Eï»¿ / ï»¿31.783Â°N 35.217Â°Eï»¿ / 31.783; 35.217  
Official languages Hebrew, Arabic[2]  
Ethnic groups 75.5% Jewish, 20.1% Arab, 4.4% minority groups  
Demonym Israeli  
Government Parliamentary democracy[2]  
- President Shimon Peres  
- Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu  
- Knesset Speaker Reuven Rivlin  
- Supreme Court President Dorit Beinisch  
Independence from British Mandate of Palestine  
- Declaration May 14, 1948  
Area  
- Total 1 20,770 / 22,072 km2 (151st)  
8,019 / 8,522 sq mi  
- Water (%) ~2%  
Population  
- 2008 estimate 7,282,0002[3] (96th)  
- 1995 census 5,548,523  
- Density 324/km2 (34th)  
839/sq mi  
GDP (PPP) 2007 estimate  
- Total $188.936 billion[4] (52nd)  
- Per capita $27,146[4] (32nd)  
GDP (nominal) 2007 estimate  
- Total $164.103 billion[4]  
- Per capita $23,578[4]  
Gini (2005) 38.6[2]  
HDI (2007) â¬ 0.932 (high) (23rd)  
Currency Israeli new sheqel (âªâ) (`ILS`)  
Time zone IST (UTC+2)  
- Summer (DST) IDT (UTC+3)  
Drives on the right  
Internet TLD .il  
Calling code 972  
1 Excluding / Including the Golan Heights and East Jerusalem; see below.  
2 Includes all permanent residents in Israel proper, the Golan Heights and
East Jerusalem. Also includes Israeli population in the West Bank. Excludes
non-Israeli population in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.  
Israel (Hebrew: ×Ö´×©Ö°××¨Ö¸×Öµ×â, Yisra'el; Arabic:
Ø¥ÙØ³ÙØ±ÙØ§Ø¦ÙÙÙÙâ, IsrÄ'Ä«l) officially the State of Israel (He-
Medinat Israel.ogg ×Ö°×Ö´×× Ö·×ª ×Ö´×©Ö°××¨Ö¸×Öµ× (helpÂ·info), Medinat
Yisra'el; Arabic: Ø¯ÙÙÙÙÙØ©Ù Ø¥ÙØ³ÙØ±ÙØ§Ø¦ÙÙÙÙâ, Dawlat
IsrÄ'Ä«l), is a country in the Middle East located on the eastern shore of
the Mediterranean Sea. It borders Lebanon in the north, Syria in the
northeast, Jordan in the east, and Egypt on the southwest, and contains
geographically diverse features within its relatively small area.[5] Also
adjacent are the West Bank to the east and Gaza Strip to the southwest. Israel
is the world's only predominantly Jewish state[6] with a population of about
7.37 million people, of which approximately 5.57 million belong to the
majority Jewish ethnoreligious group.[3][7] The largest ethnic minority group
is the segment denominated as Arab citizens of Israel, while minority
religious groups include Muslims, Christians, Druze, Samaritans and others,
most of which are found within the Arab segment.

The modern state of Israel has its religious roots in the Biblical Land of
Israel (Eretz Yisrael), a concept central to Judaism since ancient
times,[8][9] and the heartland of the ancient kingdoms of Israel and
Judah.[10] Following the birth of political Zionism in 1897 and its acceptance
by the British Balfour Declaration, the League of Nations adopted the British
Mandate of Palestine after World War I, which was "in favor of the
establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, it being
clearly understood that nothing should be done which might prejudice the civil
and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine..."[11]
In November 1947 the United Nations voted for the partition of Palestine into
two states, one Jewish and one Arab.[12] The partition plan was accepted by
Zionist leaders and rejected by Arab leaders; the 1947â1948 Civil War in
Mandatory Palestine immediately followed that decision. On May 14, 1948, with
the British mandate ending, Zionists declared Israel independent; the
neighboring Arab states invaded the next day. Israel was subsequently
victorious in confirming its independence; as a result of the war, the new
Jewish state gained control of areas beyond those in the UN Partition Plan.
Israel has since fought a series of wars with neighboring Arab states,[13] and
in consequence, Israel controls territories beyond those delineated in the
1949 Armistice Agreementsand many boundaries remain in dispute. Israel has
signed peace treaties with Egypt and Jordan, though efforts to resolve
conflict with the Palestinians have so far only met with limited success.

Israel is a representative democracy with a parliamentary system and universal
suffrage.[14][15] The Prime Minister serves as head of government and the
Knesset serves as Israel's legislative body. In terms of nominal gross
domestic product, the nation's economy is estimated as being the 44th-largest
in the world.[16] Israel ranks highest among Middle Eastern countries on the
bases of human development,[17] freedom of the press,[18][19] and economic
competitiveness.[20] Jerusalem is the country's capital, seat of government,
and largest city, while Israel's main financial center is Tel Aviv.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Etymology
  * 2 History
    * 2.1 Early roots
    * 2.2 Zionism and the British Mandate
    * 2.3 Independence and first years
    * 2.4 Conflicts and peace treaties
  * 3 Geography and climate
  * 4 Government and politics
    * 4.1 Administrative districts
    * 4.2 Occupied territories
    * 4.3 Foreign relations
  * 5 Military
  * 6 Economy
  * 7 Science and education
  * 8 Demographics
    * 8.1 Religion
  * 9 Culture
  * 10 Sports
  * 11 See also
  * 12 References
  * 13 Bibliography
  * 14 External links

  
## Etymology

Over the past three thousand years, the name "Israel" has meant in common and
religious usage both the Land of Israel and the entire Jewish nation.[21]
According to the Bible, Jacob is renamed Israel after successfully wrestling
with an angel of God.[22]

The earliest archaeological artifact to mention "Israel" (other than as a
personal name) is the Merneptah Stele of ancient Egypt (dated the late 13th
century BCE) where it refers to the people of the land.[23] The modern country
was named Medinat Yisrael, or the State of Israel, after other proposed names,
including Eretz Israel ("the Land of Israel"), Zion, and Judea, were
rejected.[24] In the early weeks of independence, the government chose the
term "Israeli" to denote a citizen of Israel, with the formal announcement
made by Minister of Foreign Affairs Moshe Sharett.[25]

## History

Main articles: History of Israel and History of the Jews in the Land of Israel

### Early roots

Further information: History of ancient Israel and Judah

<IMG>

<IMG>

Masada

The Land of Israel, known in Hebrew as Eretz Yisrael, has been sacred to the
Jewish people since Biblical times. According to the Torah, the Land of Israel
was promised to the three Patriarchs of the Jewish people, by God, as their
homeland;[26][27] scholars have placed this period in the early 2nd millennium
BCE.[28] According to the traditional view, around the 11th century BCE, the
first of a series of Israelite kingdoms and states established rule over the
region; these Israelite kingdoms and states ruled intermittently for the
following one thousand years.[29] The sites holiest to Judaism are located
within Israel.

Between the time of the Israelite kingdoms and the 7th-century Muslim
conquests, the Land of Israel fell under Assyrian, Babylonian, Persian, Greek,
Roman, Sassanian, and Byzantine rule.[30] Jewish presence in the region
dwindled after the failure of the Bar Kokhba revolt against the Roman Empire
in 132 CE and the resultant large-scale expulsion of Jews. In 628/9, the
Byzantine Emperor Heraclius conducted a massacre and expulsion of the Jews, at
which point the Jewish population probably reached its lowest point.
Nevertheless, a continuous Jewish presence in the Land of Israel remained.
Although the main Jewish population shifted from the Judea region to the
Galilee,[31] the Mishnah and part of the Talmud, among Judaism's most
important religious texts, were composed in Israel during this period.[32] The
Land of Israel was captured from the Byzantine Empire around 636 CE during the
initial Muslim conquests. Control of the region transferred between the
Umayyads,[33] Abbasids,[34] and Crusaders over the next six centuries, before
falling in the hands of the Mamluk Sultanate, in 1260. In 1516, the Land of
Israel became a part of the Ottoman Empire, which ruled the region until the
20th century.[35]

### Zionism and the British Mandate

Aliyah to Israel and settlement  
<IMG>

* * *  
Pre-Zionist Aliyah  
The Return to Zion â¢ The Old Yishuv

* * *  
Prior to the founding of Israel  
First Aliyah â¢ Second Aliyah â¢ During WWI â¢ Third Aliyah â¢ Fourth
Aliyah â¢ Fifth Aliyah â¢ During and after WWII â¢ Berihah

* * *  
After the founding of Israel  
Operation Magic Carpet â¢ Operation Ezra and Nehemiah â¢ Jewish exodus from
Arab lands â¢ Polish aliyah in 1968 â¢ Aliyah from the Soviet Union in the
1970s â¢ Aliyah from Ethiopia â¢ Aliyah from the Commonwealth of Independent
States in the 1990s â¢ Aliyah from Latin America in the 2000s

* * *  
Concepts  
Judaism â¢ Zionism â¢ Law of Return â¢ Jewish homeland â¢ Yerida â¢ Galut
â¢ Jewish Messianism

* * *  
Persons and organizations  
Theodor Herzl â¢ World Zionist Organization â¢ Knesset â¢ Nefesh B'Nefesh
â¢ Oleh â¢ El Al

* * *  
Related topics  
Jewish history â¢ Jewish diaspora â¢ History of the Jews in the Land of
Israel â¢ Yishuv â¢ History of Zionism â¢ History of Israel â¢ Timeline of
Zionism â¢ Revival of Hebrew language â¢ Religious Zionism â¢ Haredim and
Zionism â¢ Anti-Zionism

* * *  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
Main articles: History of Zionism and British Mandate of Palestine

Jews living in the Diaspora have long aspired to return to Zion and the Land
of Israel.[36] That hope and yearning was articulated in the Bible,[37] and is
a central theme in the Jewish prayer book. Beginning in the 12th century,
Catholic persecution of Jews led to a steady stream leaving Europe to settle
in the Holy Land, increasing in numbers after Jews were expelled from Spain in
1492.[38] During the 16th century large communities struck roots in the Four
Holy Cities, and in the second half of the 18th century, entire Hasidic
communities from eastern Europe settled in the Holy Land.[39]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Theodor Herzl, visionary of the Jewish State, in 1901.

The first large wave of modern immigration, known as the First Aliyah (Hebrew:
×¢××××), began in 1881, as Jews fled pogroms in Eastern Europe.[40] While
the Zionist movement already existed in theory, Theodor Herzl is credited with
founding political Zionism,[41] a movement which sought to establish a Jewish
state in the Land of Israel, by elevating the Jewish Question to the
international plane.[42] In 1896, Herzl published Der Judenstaat (The Jewish
State), offering his vision of a future state; the following year he presided
over the first World Zionist Congress.[43]

The Second Aliyah (1904â1914), began after the Kishinev pogrom. Some 40,000
Jews settled in Palestine.[40] Both the first and second waves of migrants
were mainly Orthodox Jews,[44] but those in the Second Aliyah included
socialist pioneers who established the kibbutz movement.[45] During World War
I, British Foreign Secretary Arthur Balfour issued what became known as the
Balfour Declaration, which "view[ed] with favour the establishment in
Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people". At the request of Edwin
Samuel Montagu and Lord Curzon, a line was also inserted stating "it being
clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil
and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine, or the
rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country".[46] The
Jewish Legion, a group of battalions composed primarily of Zionist volunteers,
assisted in the British conquest of Palestine. Arab opposition to the plan led
to the 1920 Palestine riots and the formation of the Jewish organization known
as the Haganah (meaning "The Defense" in Hebrew), from which the Irgun and
Lehi split off.[47]

In 1922, the League of Nations granted the United Kingdom a mandate over
Palestine under terms similar to the Balfour Declaration.[48] The population
of the area at this time was predominantly Muslim Arab, while the largest
urban area in the region, Jerusalem, was predominantly Jewish.[49]

The third (1919â1923) and Fourth Aliyah (1924â1929) brought 100,000 Jews
to Palestine.[40] From 1921 the British subjected Jewish immigration to quotas
and most of the territory slated for the Jewish state was allocated to
Transjordan.[50]

The rise of Nazism in the 1930s led to the Fifth Aliyah, with an influx of a
quarter of a million Jews. This caused the Arab revolt of 1936â1939 and led
the British to cap immigration with the White Paper of 1939. With countries
around the world turning away Jewish refugees fleeing the Holocaust, a
clandestine movement known as Aliyah Bet was organized to bring Jews to
Palestine.[40] By the end of World War II, Jews accounted for 33% of the
population of Palestine, up from 11% in 1922.[51][52]

### Independence and first years

<IMG>

<IMG>

David Ben-Gurion proclaiming Israeli independence from the United Kingdom on
May 14, 1948 below a portrait of Theodor Herzl

Main articles: 1948 Palestine war and Declaration of Independence (Israel)

After 1945 the United Kingdom became embroiled in an increasingly violent
conflict with the Jews.[53] In 1947, the British government withdrew from
commitment to the Mandate of Palestine, stating it was unable to arrive at a
solution acceptable to both Arabs and Jews.[54] The newly created United
Nations approved the UN Partition Plan (United Nations General Assembly
Resolution 181) on November 29, 1947, dividing the country into two states,
one Arab and one Jewish. Jerusalem was to be designated an international city
â a corpus separatum â administered by the UN to avoid conflict over its
status.[55] The Jewish community accepted the plan,[56] but the Arab League
and Arab Higher Committee rejected it.[57] On December 1, 1947 the Arab Higher
Committee proclaimed a three-day strike, and Arab bands began attacking Jewish
targets. Civil war began with the Jews initially on the defensive but
gradually moving into offence. The Palestinian-Arab economy collapsed and
250,000 Palestinian-Arabs fled or were expelled.[58]

On May 14, 1948, the day before the end of the British Mandate, the Jewish
Agency proclaimed independence, naming the country Israel. The following day
the armies of five Arab countries â Egypt, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq
â attacked Israel, launching the 1948 Arab-Israeli War.[59] Morocco, Sudan,
Yemen and Saudi Arabia also sent troops to assist the invaders. After a year
of fighting, a ceasefire was declared and temporary borders, known as the
Green Line, were established. Jordan annexed what became known as the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, and Egypt took control of the Gaza Strip. Israel was
admitted as a member of the United Nations on May 11, 1949.[60] During the
conflict 711,000 Arabs, according to UN estimates, or about 80% of the
previous Arab population, fled the country.[61] The fate of the Palestinian
refugees today is a major point of contention in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.[62][63]

In the early years of the state, the Labor Zionist movement led by Prime
Minister David Ben-Gurion dominated Israeli politics.[64][65] These years were
marked by mass immigration of Holocaust survivors and an influx of Jews
persecuted in Arab lands. The population of Israel rose from 800,000 to two
million between 1948 and 1958.[66] Most arrived as refugees with no
possessions and were housed in temporary camps known as ma'abarot. By 1952,
over 200,000 immigrants were living in these tent cities. The need to solve
the crisis led Ben-Gurion to sign a reparations agreement with West Germany
that triggered mass protests by Jews angered at the idea of Israel "doing
business" with Germany.[67]

During the 1950s, Israel was frequently attacked by Palestinian fedayeen,
mainly from the Egyptian-occupied Gaza Strip.[68] In 1956, Israel joined a
secret alliance with The United Kingdom and France aimed at recapturing the
Suez Canal, which the Egyptians had nationalized (see the Suez Crisis).
Despite capturing the Sinai Peninsula, Israel was forced to retreat due to
pressure from the United States and the Soviet Union in return for guarantees
of Israeli shipping rights in the Red Sea and the Canal.[69]

At the start of the following decade, Israel captured Adolf Eichmann, an
architect of the Final Solution hiding in Argentina, and brought him to
trial.[70] The trial had a major impact on public awareness of the
Holocaust,[71] and to date Eichmann remains the only person executed by
Israel,[72] although John Demjanjuk was sentenced to die before his conviction
was overturned by the Supreme Court of Israel.[73]

### Conflicts and peace treaties

Main articles: Arab-Israeli conflict and Israeli-Palestinian conflict

See also: List of United Nations resolutions concerning Israel

Daily Life in Southern Israel under rocket fire.wmv.OGG

Play video

<IMG>

Daily Life in Southern Israel under w:rockets fired from w:Gaza

Arab countries over the years refused to regard Israel as having a right to
exist, and Arab nationalists led by Nasser called for the destruction of the
state.[74] In 1967, Egypt, Syria, and Jordan massed troops close to Israeli
borders, expelled UN peacekeepers and blocked Israel's access to the Red Sea.
Israel saw these actions as a casus belli for a pre-emptive strike that
launched the Six-Day War, Israel achieved a decisive victory in which it
captured the West Bank, Gaza Strip, Sinai Peninsula and Golan Heights.[75] The
1949 Green Line became the administrative boundary between Israel and the
occupied territories. Jerusalem's boundaries were enlarged, incorporating East
Jerusalem. The Jerusalem Law, passed in 1980, reaffirmed this measure and
reignited international controversy over the status of Jerusalem.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Prime Minister Golda Meir, who resigned following the Yom Kippur War

The failure of the Arab states in the 1967 war led to the rise of Arab non-
state actors in the conflict, most importantly the Palestinian Liberation
Organization (PLO) which was committed to what it called "armed struggle as
the only way to liberate the homeland".[76][77] In the late 1960s and early
1970s, Palestinian groups launched a wave of attacks[78] against Israeli
targets around the world,[79] including a massacre of Israeli athletes at the
1972 Summer Olympics. Israel responded with Operation Wrath of God, in which
those responsible for the Munich massacre were tracked down and
assassinated.[80] From 1969 to 1970, Israel fought the War of Attrition
against Egypt.[81]

On October 6, 1973, Yom Kippur, the holiest day in the Jewish calendar, the
Egyptian and Syrian armies launched a surprise attack against Israel. The war
ended on October 26 with Israel successfully repelling Egyptian and Syrian
forces but suffering great losses.[82] An internal inquiry exonerated the
government of responsibility for the war, but public anger forced Prime
Minister Golda Meir to resign.

The 1977 Knesset elections marked a major turning point in Israeli political
history as Menachem Begin's Likud party took control from the Labor Party.[83]
Later that year, Egyptian President Anwar El Sadat made a trip to Israel and
spoke before the Knesset in what was the first recognition of Israel by an
Arab head of state.[84] In the two years that followed, Sadat and Menachem
Begin signed the Camp David Accords and the Israel-Egypt Peace Treaty.[85]
Israel withdrew from the Sinai Peninsula and agreed to enter negotiations over
an autonomy for Palestinians across the Green Line, a plan which was never
implemented. Begin's government encouraged Israelis to settle in the West
Bank, leading to friction with the Palestinians in those areas.

On June 7, 1981, Israel heavily bombed Iraq's Osirak nuclear reactor in
Operation Opera, disabling it. Israeli intelligence had suspected Iraq was
intending to use it for weapons development. In 1982, Israel intervened in the
Lebanese Civil War to destroy the bases from which the Palestine Liberation
Organization launched attacks and missiles at northern Israel. That move
developed into the First Lebanon War.[86] Israel withdrew from most of Lebanon
in 1986, but maintained a borderland buffer zone until 2000. The First
Intifada, a Palestinian uprising against Israeli rule,[87] broke out in 1987
with waves of violence occurring in the occupied territories. Over the
following six years, more than a thousand people were killed in the ensuing
violence, much of which was internal Palestinian violence.[88] During the 1991
Gulf War, the PLO and many Palestinians supported Saddam Hussein and Iraqi
missile attacks against Israel.[89][90]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat shake hands, presided over by Bill Clinton, at
the signing of the Oslo Accords, September 13, 1993

In 1992, Yitzhak Rabin became Prime Minister following an election in which
his party promoted compromise with Israel's neighbors.[91][92] The following
year, Shimon Peres and Mahmoud Abbas, on behalf of Israel and the PLO, signed
the Oslo Accords, which gave the Palestinian National Authority the right to
self-govern parts of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.[93] A declared intent
was recognition of Israel's right to exist and an end to terrorism.[94] In
1994, the Israel-Jordan Treaty of Peace was signed, making Jordan the second
Arab country to normalize relations with Israel.[95]

Arab public support for the Accords was damaged by the Cave of the Patriarchs
massacre, continuation of settlements,[96] and checkpoints, and the
deterioration of economic conditions. Israeli public support for the Accords
waned as Israel was struck by Palestinian suicide attacks. While leaving a
peace rally in November 1995, Yitzhak Rabin was assassinated by a far-right-
wing Jew who opposed the Accords. The country was shocked.

At the end of the 1990s, Israel, under the leadership of Benjamin Netanyahu,
withdrew from Hebron,[97] and signed the Wye River Memorandum, giving greater
control to the Palestinian National Authority.[98]

Ehud Barak, elected Prime Minister in 1999, began the new millennium by
withdrawing forces from Southern Lebanon and conducting negotiations with
Palestinian Authority Chairman Yasser Arafat and U.S. President Bill Clinton
at the July 2000 Camp David Summit. During the summit, Barak offered a plan
for the establishment of a Palestinian state, but Yasser Arafat rejected
it.[99] After the collapse of the talks, the Second Intifada began.

Ariel Sharon became the new prime minister in a 2001 special election. During
his tenure, Sharon carried out his plan to unilaterally withdraw from the Gaza
Strip and also spearheaded the construction of the Israeli West Bank
barrier.[100] In January 2006, after Ariel Sharon suffered a severe stroke
which left him in a coma, the powers of office were transferred to Ehud
Olmert.

In July 2006, a Hezbollah artillery assault on Israel's northern border
communities and a cross border abduction of two Israeli soldiers sparked the
Second Lebanon War.[101][102] The clashes were brought to an end a month later
by a ceasefire (United Nations Resolution 1701) brokered by the United Nations
Security Council.

On November 27, 2007, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas agreed to negotiate on all issues and strive for an
agreement by the end of 2008. On September 6, 2007, the Israeli Air Force
launched Operation Orchard in Syria, bombing what it suspected to be a nuclear
site.[103] In April 2008, Syrian President Bashar Al Assad told a Qatari
newspaper that Syria and Israel had been discussing a peace treaty for a year,
with Turkey as a go-between. This was confirmed by Israel in May 2008.[104]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Rocket and mortar shells from Gaza into Israel, February 2009

In December 2008, a ceasefire between Hamas and Israel collapsed; Hamas said
this was because Israel had not lifted a blockade on the Gaza strip and Israel
said it was because Hamas was firing rockets into Israel from Gaza.[105]
Israel responded by launching Operation Cast Lead with a series of
airstrikes.[106] On 3 January 2009, Israeli Troops entered Gaza marking the
start of a ground offensive.[107] On Saturday, January 17, Israel announced a
unilateral ceasefire, conditional on elimination of further rocket and mortar
attacks from Gaza, and began withdrawing over the next several days.[108]
Hamas later announced its own ceasefire, with its own conditions of complete
withdrawal and opening of border crossings. Despite neither the Qassam
launchings nor Israeli retaliatory strikes having completely stopped, the
fragile ceasefire remained in order.[109]

## Geography and climate

Main article: Geography of Israel

<IMG>

<IMG>

The central Judean Mountains

Israel is located at the eastern end of the Mediterranean Sea, bounded by
Lebanon to the north, Syria to the northeast, Jordan to the east, and Egypt to
the southwest. The sovereign territory of Israel, excluding all territories
captured by Israel during the 1967 Six-Day War, is approximately 20,770 square
kilometers (8,019 sq mi) in area, of which two percent is water.[2] The total
area under Israeli law, including East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights, is
22,072 square kilometers (8,522 sq mi).[110]

The total area under Israeli control, including the military-controlled and
partially Palestinian-governed territory of the West Bank, is 27,799 square
kilometers (10,733 sq mi).[111]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Jordan river

Despite its small size, Israel is home to a variety of geographic features,
from the Negev desert in the south to the mountain ranges of the Galilee,
Carmel, and the Golan in the north. The Israeli Coastal Plain on the shores of
the Mediterranean is home to seventy percent of the nation's population.

East of the central highlands lies the Jordan Rift Valley, which forms a small
part of the 6,500-kilometer (4,040-mi) Great Rift Valley. The Jordan River
runs along the Jordan Rift Valley, from Mount Hermon through the Hulah Valley
and the Sea of Galilee to the Dead Sea, the lowest point on the surface of the
Earth.[112] Further south is the Arabah, ending with the Gulf of Eilat, part
of the Red Sea.

<IMG>

<IMG>

View from the Israeli coast of the Dead Sea

Unique to Israel and the Sinai Peninsula are makhteshim, or erosion
cirques.[113] The largest makhtesh in the world is Ramon Crater in the
Negev,[114] which measures 40 kilometers by 8 kilometers (25 mi by 5 mi).[115]
A report on the environmental status of the Mediterranean basin states that
Israel has the largest number of plant species per square meter of all the
countries in the basin.[116]

Temperatures in Israel vary widely, especially during the winter. The more
mountainous regions can be windy, cold, and sometimes snowy; Mount Hermon's
peak is covered with snow most of the year and Jerusalem usually receives at
least one snowfall each year.[117] Meanwhile, coastal cities, such as Tel Aviv
and Haifa, have a typical Mediterranean climate with cool, rainy winters and
long, hot summers. The highest temperature in the continent of Asia (53.7 Â°C
or 129 Â°F) was recorded in 1942 at Tirat Zvi kibbutz in the northern parts of
the Jordan-valley.[118] From May to September, rain in Israel is
rare.[119][120] With scarce water resources, Israel has developed various
water-saving technologies, including drip irrigation.[121] Israelis also take
advantage of the considerable sunlight available for solar energy, making
Israel the leading nation in solar energy use per capita.[122]

## Government and politics

Main article: Politics of Israel

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Knesset building, home of the Israeli parliament

Israel operates under a parliamentary system as a democratic country with
universal suffrage.[2] The President of Israel is the head of state, but his
duties are largely ceremonial.[123] A Parliament Member supported by a
majority in parliament becomes the Prime Minister, usually the chairman of the
largest party. The Prime Minister is the head of government and head of the
Cabinet.[123][124] Israel is governed by a 120-member parliament, known as the
Knesset. Membership in the Knesset is based on proportional representation of
political parties,[125] with a 2% electoral threshold, which commonly results
in coalition governments. Parliamentary elections are scheduled every four
years, but unstable coalitions or a no-confidence vote by the Knesset often
dissolves governments earlier. "The average life span of an Israeli government
is 22 months. The peace process, the role of religion in the state, and
political scandals have caused coalitions to break apart or produced early
elections."[126] The Basic Laws of Israel function as an unwritten
constitution. In 2003, the Knesset began to draft an official constitution
based on these laws.[2][127]

Sister project Wikinews has related news: Shimon Peres discusses the future of
Israel  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Office of the President of Israel in 2007.

Israel has a three-tier court system. At the lowest level are magistrate
courts, situated in most cities across the country. Above them are district
courts, serving both as appellate courts and courts of first instance; they
are situated in five of Israel's six districts. The third and highest tier in
Israel is the Supreme Court, seated in Jerusalem. It serves a dual role as the
highest court of appeals and the High Court of Justice. In the latter role,
the Supreme Court rules as a court of first instance, allowing individuals,
both citizens and non-citizens, to petition against decisions of state
authorities.[128][129] Israel is not a member of the International Criminal
Court as it fears the court would be biased against it due to political
pressure.[130] Israel's legal system combines English common law, civil law,
and Jewish law.[2] It is based on the principle of stare decisis (precedent)
and is an adversarial system, where the parties in the suit bring evidence
before the court. Court cases are decided by professional judges rather than
juries.[128] Marriage and divorce are under the jurisdiction of the religious
courts: Jewish, Muslim, Druze, and Christian. A committee of Knesset members,
Supreme Court justices, and Israeli Bar members carries out the election of
judges.[131]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Districts of Israel: (1) Northern, (2) Haifa, (3) Center, (4) Tel Aviv, (5)
Jerusalem, (6) Southern

Basic Law: Human Dignity and Liberty seeks to defend human rights and
liberties in Israel. Israel is the only country in the region ranked "Free" by
Freedom House based on the level of civil and political rights; the "Israeli
Occupied Territories/Palestinian Authority" was ranked "Not Free."[132]
Similarly, Reporters Without Borders rated Israel 50th out of 168 countries in
terms of freedom of the press and highest among Southwest Asian
countries.[133] Nevertheless, groups such as Amnesty International[134] and
Human Rights Watch[135] have often disapproved of Israel's human rights record
in regards to the Arab-Israeli conflict. Israel's civil liberties also allow
for self-criticism, from groups such as B'Tselem, an Israeli human rights
organization.[136]

### Administrative districts

Main articles: Districts of Israel and List of cities in Israel

The State of Israel is divided into six main administrative districts, known
as mehozot (××××××ª; singular: mahoz) â Center, Haifa, Jerusalem,
North, Southern, and Tel Aviv Districts. Districts are further divided into
fifteen sub-districts known as nafot (× ×¤××ª; singular: nafa), which are
themselves partitioned into fifty natural regions.[137] For statistical
purposes, the country is divided into three metropolitan areas: Tel Aviv and
Gush Dan (population 3,150,000), Haifa (population 996,000), and Beersheba
(population 531,600).[138] Israel's largest city, both in population and
area,[139] is Jerusalem with 732,100 residents in an area of 126 square
kilometers (49 sq mi). Tel Aviv, Haifa, and Rishon LeZion rank as Israel's
next most populous cities, with populations of 384,600, 267,000, and 222,300
respectively.[140]

### Occupied territories

Main articles: Israeli-occupied territories and Political status of the West
Bank and Gaza Strip

<IMG>

<IMG>

Map of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, 2007

In 1967, as a result of the Six-Day War, Israel gained control of the West
Bank, East Jerusalem, the Gaza strip and the Golan Heights. Israel also took
control of the Sinai Peninsula, but returned it to Egypt as part of the 1979
Israel-Egypt Peace Treaty.

Following Israel's capture of these territories, settlements consisting of
Israeli citizens were established within each of them. Israel has applied
civilian law to the Golan Heights and East Jerusalem, incorporating them into
its territory and offering their inhabitants Israeli citizenship. In contrast,
the West Bank has remained under military occupation, and it, East Jerusalem,
and the Gaza Strip are seen by the Palestinians and most of the international
community as the site of a future Palestinian state. The status of East
Jerusalem in any future peace settlement has at times been a difficult hurdle
in negotiations between Israeli governments and representatives of the
Palestinians. Most negotiations relating to the territories have been on the
basis of United Nations Security Council Resolution 242, which calls on Israel
to withdraw from occupied territories in return for normalization of relations
with Arab states, a principle known as "Land for peace".[141][142][143]

The West Bank was annexed by Jordan in 1948, following the Arab rejection of
the UN decision to create two states in Palestine. Only Britain recognized
this annexation and Jordan has since renounced its claim to the territory. The
West Bank was occupied by Israel in 1967. The population are mainly Arab
Palestinians, including refugees of the 1948 Arab-Israeli War.[144] From their
occupation in 1967 until 1993, the Palestinians living in these territories
were under Israeli military administration. Since the Israel-PLO letters of
recognition, most of the Palestinian population and cities have been under the
internal jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority, and only partial Israeli
military control, although Israel has on several occasions redeployed its
troops and reinstated full military administration during periods of unrest.
In response to increasing attacks as part of the Second Intifada, the Israeli
government started to construct the Israeli West Bank barrier,[145] which
opponents note is partially built within the West Bank.[146]

The Gaza strip was occupied by Egypt from 1948-1967 and then by Israel from
1967-2005. In 2005, as part of Israel's unilateral disengagement plan, Israel
removed all of its residents and forces from the territory. However, Israel
still controls Gaza's airspace and sea access and has on occasion sent troops
into the area.[147] Gaza has a border with Egypt and an agreement between
Israel, the EU, the PA and Egypt governed how border crossing would take place
(it was monitored by European observers),[148] However the election of a Hamas
government has led to problems in implementing it resulting in the border
crossing being closed much of the time.[149] Inner control of Gaza is in the
hands of the Hamas government.

### Foreign relations

Main article: Foreign relations of Israel

<IMG>

<IMG>

Chaim Weizmann, the first President of Israel, presenting U.S. President Harry
S. Truman with a Torah scroll in 1948

Israel maintains diplomatic relations with 161 countries and has 94 diplomatic
missions around the world.[150] Only three members of the Arab League have
normalized relations with Israel; Egypt and Jordan signed peace treaties in
1979 and 1994, respectively, and Mauritania opted for full diplomatic
relations with Israel in 1999. Two other members of the Arab League, Morocco
and Tunisia, which had some diplomatic relations with Israel, severed them at
the start of the Second Intifada in 2000.[151] Since 2003, ties with Morocco
have been improved, and Israel's foreign minister has visited the
country.[152] Under Israeli law, Lebanon, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, and Yemen
are enemy countries[153] and Israeli citizens may not visit them without
permission from the Ministry of the Interior.[154] Since 1995, Israel has been
a member of the Mediterranean Dialogue, which fosters cooperation between
seven countries in the Mediterranean Basin and the members of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.[155]

Foreign relations with United States, Turkey, Germany, the United Kingdom and
India are among Israel's strongest. The United States was the first country to
recognize the State of Israel, followed by the Soviet Union. The United States
may regard Israel as its primary ally in the Middle East, based on "common
democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests". Their
bilateral relations are multidimensional and the United States is the
principal proponent of the Arab-Israeli peace process. U.S. and Israeli views
differ on some issues, such as the Golan Heights, Jerusalem, and
settlements.[156] Although Turkey and Israel did not establish full diplomatic
relations until 1991,[157] Turkey has cooperated with the State since its
recognition of Israel in 1949. Turkey's ties to the other Muslim-majority
nations in the region have at times resulted in pressure from Arab states to
temper its relationship with Israel.[158] Germany's strong ties with Israel
include cooperation on scientific and educational endeavors and the two states
remain strong economic and military partners.[159][160] India established full
diplomatic ties with Israel in 1992 and has fostered a strong military and
cultural partnership with the country since then.[161] The UK has kept full
diplomatic relations with Israel since its formation having had two visits
from heads of state in 2007. It also has a strong trade relationship, Israel
being the 23rd largest market. Relations between the two countries were also
made stronger by former prime minister Tony Blair's efforts for a two state
resolution. The UK is seen as having a "natural" relationship with Israel on
account of the British Mandate of Palestine.[162] Iran had diplomatic
relations with Israel under the Pahlavi dynasty[163] but withdrew its
recognition of Israel during the Iranian Revolution.[164]

## Military

Main articles: Israel Defense Forces and Israeli Security Forces

<IMG>

<IMG>

Israeli Air Force F-15 Strike Eagle

<IMG>

<IMG>

Israeli Army Merkava main battle tank

The Israel Defense Forces consists of the Israeli Army, Israeli Air Force and
Israeli Sea Corps. It was founded during the 1948 Arab-Israeli War out of
paramilitary organizations â chiefly the Haganah â that preceded the
establishment of the state.[165] The IDF also draws upon the resources of the
Military Intelligence Directorate (Aman), which works with the Mossad and
Shabak.[166] The involvement of the Israel Defense Forces in major wars and
border conflicts has made it one of the most battle-trained armed forces in
the world.[167][168]

The majority of Israelis are drafted into the military at the age of eighteen.
Men serve three years and women serve two years.[169] Following compulsory
service, Israeli men join the reserve forces and do several weeks of reserve
duty every year until their forties. Most women are exempt from reserve duty.
Arab citizens of Israel (except the Druze) and those engaged in full-time
religious studies are exempt from military service, although the exemption of
yeshiva students has been a source of contention in Israeli society for many
years.[170][171] An alternative for those who receive exemptions on various
grounds is Sherut Leumi, or national service, which involves a program of
service in hospitals, schools and other social welfare frameworks.[172] As a
result of its conscription program, the IDF maintains approximately 168,000
active troops and an additional 408,000 reservists.[173]

The nation's military relies heavily on high-tech weapons systems designed and
manufactured in Israel as well as some foreign imports. The United States is a
particularly notable foreign contributor; they are expected to provide the
country with $30 billion in military aid between 2008 and 2017.[174] The
Israeli- and U.S.-designed Arrow missile is one of the world's only
operational anti-ballistic missile systems.[175] Since the Yom Kippur War,
Israel has developed a network of reconnaissance satellites.[176] The success
of the Ofeq program has made Israel one of seven countries capable of
launching such satellites.[177] The country has also developed its own main
battle tank, the Merkava. Since its establishment, Israel has spent a
significant portion of its gross domestic product on defense. In 1984, for
example, the country spent 24%[178] of its GDP on defense. Today, that figure
has dropped to 7.3%.[2]

Israel has not signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and maintains a
policy of deliberate ambiguity toward its nuclear capabilities, though it is
widely regarded as possessing nuclear weapons.[179] After the Gulf War in
1991, when Israel was attacked by Iraqi Scud missiles, a law was passed
requiring all apartments and homes in Israel to have a mamad, a reinforced
security room impermeable to chemical and biological substances.[180]

## Economy

Main articles: Economy of Israel and Tourism in Israel

<IMG>

<IMG>

A main business district in Ramat Gan, where the diamond stock exchange is
located

Israel is considered one of the most advanced countries in Southwest Asia in
economic and industrial development. The country is ranked 3rd in the region
on the World Bank's Ease of Doing Business Index[181] as well as in the World
Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report.[20] It has the second-largest
number of startup companies in the world (after the United States) and the
largest number of NASDAQ-listed companies outside North America.[182] In 2007,
Israel had the 44th-highest gross domestic product and 22nd-highest gross
domestic product per capita (at purchasing power parity) at US$232.7 billion
and US$33,299, respectively.[183] In 2007, Israel was invited to join the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,[184] which promotes
cooperation between countries that adhere to democratic principles and operate
free market economies.[185]

Despite limited natural resources, intensive development of the agricultural
and industrial sectors over the past decades has made Israel largely self-
sufficient in food production, apart from grains and beef. Other major imports
to Israel, totaling US$47.8 billion in 2006, include fossil fuels, raw
materials, and military equipment.[2] Leading exports include fruits,
vegetables, pharmaceuticals, software, chemicals, military technology, and
diamonds; in 2006, Israeli exports reached US$42.86 billion.[2] Israel is a
global leader in water conservation and geothermal energy,[186] and its
development of cutting-edge technologies in software, communications and the
life sciences have evoked comparisons with Silicon Valley.[187][188]
Intel[189] and Microsoft[190] built their first overseas research and
development centers in Israel, and other high-tech multi-national
corporations, such as IBM, Cisco Systems, and Motorola, have opened facilities
in the country. In July 2007, U.S. billionaire Warren Buffett's Berkshire
Hathaway bought an Israeli company Iscar, its first non-U.S. acquisition, for
$4 billion.[191] Since the 1970s, Israel has received economic aid from the
United States, whose loans account for the bulk of Israel's external debt.[2]
In 2007, the United States approved another 30 billion dollars in aid to
Israel over the next ten years.[174]

Tourism, especially religious tourism, is another important industry in
Israel, with the country's temperate climate, beaches, archaeological and
historical sites, and unique geography also drawing tourists. Israel's
security problems have taken their toll on the industry, but the number of
incoming tourists is on the rebound.[192] Three million tourists visited
Israel in 2008.[193]

## Science and education

Main articles: Education in Israel, Science and technology in Israel, and List
of universities and colleges in Israel

<IMG>

<IMG>

The particle accelerator at the Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot

Israel has the highest school life expectancy in Southwest Asia, and is tied
with Japan for second-highest school life expectancy on the Asian continent
(after South Korea).[194] Israel similarly has the highest literacy rate in
Southwest Asia, according to the United Nations.[195] The State Education Law,
passed in 1953, established five types of schools: state secular, state
religious, ultra orthodox, communal settlement schools, and Arab schools. The
public secular is the largest school group, and is attended by the majority of
Jewish and non-Arab pupils in Israel. Most Arabs send their children to
schools where Arabic is the language of instruction.[196]

Education is compulsory in Israel for children between the ages of three and
eighteen.[197][198] Schooling is divided into three tiers â primary school
(grades 1â6), middle school (grades 7â9), and high school (grades 10â12)
â culminating with Bagrut matriculation exams. Proficiency in core subjects
such as mathematics, Bible, Hebrew language, Hebrew and general literature,
English, history, and civics is necessary to receive a Bagrut
certificate.[199] In Arab, Christian and Druze schools, the exam on Biblical
studies is replaced by an exam in Islam, Christianity or Druze heritage.[200]
In 2003, over half of all Israeli twelfth graders earned a matriculation
certificate.[201]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The world's largest solar parabolic dish at the Ben-Gurion National Solar
Energy Center.[202]

Israel's eight public universities are subsidized by the state.[199][203] The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel's oldest university, houses the Jewish
National and University Library, the world's largest repository of books on
Jewish subjects.[204] In 2006, the Hebrew University was ranked 60th[205] and
119th[206] in two surveys of the world's top universities. Other major
universities in the country include the Technion, the Weizmann Institute of
Science, Tel Aviv University, Bar-Ilan University, the University of Haifa,
and Ben-Gurion University of the Negev. Israel's seven research universities
(excluding the Open University) have been ranked in the top 500 in the
world.[207] Israel ranks third in the world in the number of citizens who hold
university degrees (20 percent of the population).[208][209] During the 1990s,
an influx of a million immigrants from the former Soviet Union (forty percent
of whom were university graduates) helped boost Israel's high-tech
sector.[208] Israel has produced four Nobel Prize-winning scientists[210] and
publishes among the most scientific papers per capita of any country in the
world.[211][212] In 2003, Ilan Ramon became Israel's first astronaut, serving
as payload specialist of STS-107, the fatal mission of the Space Shuttle
Columbia.

Israel has embraced solar energy, its engineers are on the cutting edge of
solar energy technology[213] and its solar companies work on projects around
the world.[214][215] Over 90% of Israeli homes use solar energy for hot water,
the highest per capita in the world.[216] [217] According to the Ministry of
National Infrastructures, the country saves an estimated 2 million barrels of
oil a year because of its solar energy use.[218] The high annual incident
solar irradiance at its geographic latitude creates ideal conditions for what
is an internationally renowned solar research and development industry in the
Negev Desert.[213][215][214]

## Demographics

Main article: Demographics of Israel

As of 2008, Israel's population is 7.28 million.[3] Of those, over 260,000
Israeli citizens lived in the West Bank settlements[219][220][221] such as
Ma'ale Adumim and Ariel, and communities that predated the establishment of
the State but were re-established after the Six-Day War, in cities such as
Hebron and Gush Etzion. 18,000 Israelis live in the Golan Heights.[222] In
2006, there were 250,000 Jews living in East Jerusalem.[223] The total number
of Israeli settlers is over 500,000 (6.5 % of the Israeli population).
Approximately 7,800 Israelis lived in settlements in the Gaza Strip until they
were evacuated by the government as part of its 2005 disengagement plan.[224]

Israel has two official languages, Hebrew and Arabic.[2] Hebrew is the primary
language of the state and spoken by the majority of the population. Arabic is
spoken by the Arab minority and Jews who immigrated to Israel from Arab lands.
Most Israelis can communicate reasonably well in English, as many television
programs are in English and many schools begin to teach English in the early
grades. As a country of immigrants, dozens of languages can be heard on the
streets of Israel. A large influx of people from the former Soviet Union and
Ethiopia have made Russian and Amharic widely spoken in Israel. Between 1990
and 1994, the immigration of Jews from the former Soviet Union increased
Israel's population by twelve percent.[225] Over the last decade, immigration
flows have also included significant numbers of workers from countries such as
Romania, Thailand, China, and a number of countries in Africa and South
America; gauging precise numbers is difficult because of the presence of
"undocumented" immigrants, but estimates run in the region of 200,000.[226]
Retention of Israel's population since 1948 is about even or greater, when
compared to other countries with mass immigration.[227] Emigration from Israel
(yerida) to other countries, primarily the United States and Canada, is
described by demographers as modest[228] but is often cited by Israeli
government ministries as a major threat to Israel's future.[229][230]

### Religion

Main article: Religion in Israel

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Western Wall and the Dome of the Rock, Jerusalem

Israel was established as a homeland for the Jewish people and is often
referred to as the Jewish state. The country's Law of Return grants all Jews
and those of Jewish lineage the right to Israeli citizenship.[231] Just over
three quarters, or 75.5%, of the population are Jews from a diversity of
Jewish backgrounds. Approximately 68% of Israeli Jews are Israeli-born, 22%
are immigrants from Europe and the Americas, and 10% are immigrants from Asia
and Africa (including the Arab World).[232] The religious affiliation of
Israeli Jews varies widely: 55% say they are "traditional," while 20% consider
themselves "secular Jews," 17% define themselves as "Orthodox Jews"; the final
8% define themselves as "Haredi Jews."[233]

<IMG>

<IMG>

BahÃ¡'Ã­ World Centre in Haifa

Making up 16.2% of the population, Muslims constitute Israel's largest
religious minority. About 2% of the population are Christian and 1.5% are
Druze.[234] Members of many other religious groups, including Buddhists and
Hindus, maintain a presence in Israel, albeit in small numbers.[235] The
Christian population includes both Arab Christians and Messianic Jews.[236]

The city of Jerusalem is of special importance to Jews, Muslims and Christians
as it is the home of sites that are pivotal to their religious beliefs, such
as the Western Wall, the Temple Mount, the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Church of
the Holy Sepulchre. Other landmarks of religious importance are located in the
West Bank, among them the birthplace of Jesus and Rachel's Tomb in Bethlehem,
and the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron.

The administrative center of the BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith and the Shrine of the BÃ¡b are
located at the BahÃ¡'Ã­ World Centre in Haifa and the leader of the faith is
buried in Acre. Apart from maintenance staff, there is no BahÃ¡'Ã­ community
in Israel, although it is a destination for pilgrimages. BahÃ¡'Ã­ staff in
Israel do not teach their faith to Israelis following strict policy.[237][238]

## Culture

Main article: Culture of Israel

<IMG>

<IMG>

Hebrew Book Week 2005 in Jerusalem

Israel's diverse culture stems from the diversity of the population: Jews from
around the world have brought their cultural and religious traditions with
them, creating a melting pot of Jewish customs and beliefs.[239] Israel is the
only country in the world where life revolves around the Hebrew calendar. Work
and school holidays are determined by the Jewish holidays, and the official
day of rest is Saturday, the Jewish Sabbath.[240] Israel's substantial Arab
minority has also left its imprint on Israeli culture in such spheres as
architecture,[241] music,[242] and cuisine.[243]

Israeli literature is primarily poetry and prose written in Hebrew, as part of
the renaissance of Hebrew as a spoken language since the mid-19th century,
although a small body of literature is published in other languages, such as
Arabic and English. By law, two copies of all printed matter published in
Israel must be deposited in the Jewish National and University Library at the
Hebrew University of Jerusalem. In 2001, the law was amended to include audio
and video recordings, and other non-print media.[244] In 2006, 85 percent of
the 8,000 books transferred to the library were in Hebrew.[245] The Hebrew
Book Week (He: ×©×××¢ ××¡×¤×¨) is held each June and features book fairs,
public readings, and appearances by Israeli authors around the country. During
the week, Israel's top literary award, the Sapir Prize, is presented. In 1966,
Shmuel Yosef Agnon shared the Nobel Prize in Literature with German Jewish
author Nelly Sachs.[246]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Batsheva Dance Company in Tel Aviv

Israeli music contains musical influences from all over the world; Yemenite
music, Hasidic melodies, Arabic music, Greek music, jazz, and pop rock are all
part of the music scene.[247][248] The nation's canonical folk songs, known as
"Songs of the Land of Israel," deal with the experiences of the pioneers in
building the Jewish homeland.[249] Among Israel's world-renowned[250]
orchestras is the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra, which has been in operation
for over seventy years and today performs more than two hundred concerts each
year.[251] Israel has also produced many musicians of note, some achieving
international stardom. Itzhak Perlman, Pinchas Zukerman and Ofra Haza are
among the internationally acclaimed musicians born in Israel. Israel has
participated in the Eurovision Song Contest nearly every year since 1973,
winning the competition three times and hosting it twice.[252] Eilat has
hosted its own international music festival, the Red Sea Jazz Festival, every
summer since 1987.[253]

Continuing the strong theatrical traditions of the Yiddish theater in Eastern
Europe, Israel maintains a vibrant theatre scene. Founded in 1918, Habima
Theatre in Tel Aviv is Israel's oldest repertory theater company and national
theater.[254]

The Israel Museum in Jerusalem is one of Israel's most important cultural
institutions[255] and houses the Dead Sea scrolls,[256] along with an
extensive collection of Judaica and European art.[255] Israel's national
Holocaust museum, Yad Vashem, houses the world's largest archive of Holocaust-
related information.[257] Beth Hatefutsoth (the Diaspora Museum), on the
campus of Tel Aviv University, is an interactive museum devoted to the history
of Jewish communities around the world.[258] Apart from the major museums in
large cities, there are high-quality artspaces in many towns and kibbutzim.
Mishkan Le'Omanut on Kibbutz Ein Harod Meuhad is the largest art museum in the
north of the country.[259]

## Sports

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ramat Gan Stadium, Israel's largest stadium

Main article: Sports in Israel

Sports and physical fitness have not always been paramount in Jewish culture.
Athletic prowess, which was prized by the ancient Greeks, was looked down upon
as an unwelcome intrusion of Hellenistic values. Maimonides, who was both a
rabbi and a physician, emphasized the importance of physical activity and
keeping the body in shape. This approach received a boost in the 19th century
from the physical culture campaign of Max Nordau, and in the early 20th
century when the Chief Rabbi of Palestine, Abraham Isaac Kook, declared that
"the body serves the soul, and only a healthy body can ensure a healthy
soul".[260]

The Maccabiah Games, an Olympic-style event for Jewish athletes, was
inaugurated in the 1930s, and has been held every four years since then. The
most popular spectator sports in Israel today are association football and
basketball.[261] In 1964 Israel hosted and won the Asian Nations Cup.

In the Seventies Israel was excluded from the 1978 Asian Games following the
organizers' refusal to invite the country as a result of pressure by
participating middle eastern countries. The exclusion led Israel to shift from
Asia to Europe and cease competing in Asian competitions.[262] In 1994, UEFA
agreed to admit Israel and all Israeli sporting organizations now compete in
Europe. Ligat ha'Al is the country's premier soccer league, and Ligat HaAl is
the premier basketball league.[263] Maccabi Tel Aviv B.C. has won the European
championship in basketball five times.[264]

Beersheba has become a national chess center and home to many chess champions
from the former Soviet Union. The city hosted the World Team Chess
Championship in 2005, and chess is taught in the city's kindergartens.[265] In
2007, an Israeli tied for second place in the World Chess Championship.[266]

To date, Israel has won seven Olympic medals since its first win in 1992,
including a gold medal in windsurfing at the 2004 Summer Olympics.[267] Israel
has won over 100 gold medals in the Paralympic Games and is ranked about 15th
in the all time medal count. The 1968 Summer Paralympics were hosted by
Israel.[268]

## See also

<IMG> Israel portal  
  * Outline of Israel

  

## References

  1. ^ a b The Jerusalem Law states that "Jerusalem, complete and united, is the capital of Israel" and the city serves as the seat of the government, home to the President's residence, government offices, supreme court, and parliament. The United Nations and most countries do not accept the Jerusalem Law (see Kellerman 1993, p. 140) and maintain their embassies in other cities such as Tel Aviv, Ramat Gan, and Herzliya (see the CIA Factbook and Map of Israel) The Palestinian Authority sees East Jerusalem as the capital of a future Palestinian state and the city's final status awaits future negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian Authority (see "Negotiating Jerusalem", University of Maryland). See Positions on Jerusalem for more information.
  2. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l "Israel". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 2007-06-19. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/is.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-20.
  3. ^ a b c "Main Indicators". Central Bureau of Statistics. 2008-05-07. http://www1.cbs.gov.il/reader/mainind/indengnew.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-20.
  4. ^ a b c d "Israel". International Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=436&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=&pr.x=50&pr.y=10. Retrieved on 2008-10-09.
  5. ^ Skolnik 2007, pp. 132â232
  6. ^ "Israel". Country Report. Freedom House. 2007. http://www.freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=363&year=2007&country=7199. Retrieved on 2007-07-15.
  7. ^ "Time Series-DataBank". Central Bureau of Statistics. http://www.cbs.gov.il/ts/. Retrieved on 2009-02-20.
  8. ^ "Judaism". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/307197/Judaism/35241/Israel-the-Jewish-people. Retrieved on 2008-12-30.
  9. ^ See, for example, Genesis 12 and 13. Etz Hayim: Torah and Commentary. Jewish Publication Society, 2001.
  10. ^ "Dictionary.com - 'jew.'" Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary. MICRA, Inc. 16 Feb. 2009.
  11. ^ "The Palestine Mandate". The Avalon Project. Yale University. 1922-07-24. http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/mideast/palmanda.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-06.
  12. ^ "United Nations General Assembly Resolution 181". The Avalon Project. Yale University. 1947-11-29. http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/un/res181.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-21.
  13. ^ "Arab-Israeli wars". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/31439/Arab-Israeli-wars. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  14. ^ Rummel 1997, p. 257\. "A current list of liberal democracies includes: Andorra, Argentina, ... , Cyprus, ... , Israel, ..."
  15. ^ "Global Survey 2006: Middle East Progress Amid Global Gains in Freedom". Freedom House. 2005-12-19. http://www.freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=70&release=317. Retrieved on 2007-07-01.
  16. ^ "Total GDP 2006" (PDF). The World Bank. 2007-07-01. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DATASTATISTICS/Resources/GDP.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-03.
  17. ^ "Human Development Report 2006". United Nations Development Programme. http://hdr.undp.org/hdr2006/statistics/. Retrieved on 2007-07-15.
  18. ^ "Worldwide Press Freedom Index 2007". Reporters Without Borders. http://www.rsf.org/article.php3?id_article=24025. Retrieved on 2008-02-29.
  19. ^ See the 10 highest HDIs in Asia & Oceanea.
  20. ^ a b "Global Competitiveness Report 2006-2007". World Economic Forum. 2007-02-14. http://www.weforum.org/en/initiatives/gcp/Global%20Competitiveness%20Report/index.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-15.
  21. ^ Levine, Robert A.. "See Israel as a Jewish Nation-State, More or Less Democratic". The International Herald Tribune. ISSN 0294-8052. http://www.iht.com/articles/2000/11/07/edlevine.t.php. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  22. ^ From the King James Version of the Bible: "And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed." (Genesis, 32:28). See also Hosea 12:5.
  23. ^ Barton & Bowden 2004, p. 126\. "The Merneptah Stele... is arguably the oldest evidence outside the Bible for the existence of Israel as early as the 13th century BCE."
  24. ^ "Popular Opinion". The Palestine Post. 1947-12-07. p. 1.
  25. ^ "On the Move". TIME Magazine. 1948-05-31. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,798687-2,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-06.
  26. ^ From the King James Version of the Bible: "And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers." (Deuteronomy, 30:5)
  27. ^ From the King James Version of the Bible: "But if ye turn unto me, and keep my commandments, and do them; though there were of you cast out unto the uttermost part of the heaven, yet will I gather them from thence, and will bring them unto the place that I have chosen to set my name there." (Nehemiah, 1:9)
  28. ^ "Walking the Bible Timeline". Walking the Bible. Public Broadcast Television. http://www.pbs.org/walkingthebible/timeline.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-29.
  29. ^ Friedland & Hecht 2000, p. 8\. "For a thousand years Jerusalem was the seat of Jewish sovereignty, the household site of kings, the location of its legislative councils and courts."
  30. ^ "Ancient Palestine". Encarta. Microsoft. 2007. http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_701844154_2/Palestine_Ancient.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-30.
  31. ^ "Palestine: History". The Online Encyclopedia of the Roman Provinces. The University of South Dakota. 2007-02-22. http://www.usd.edu/~clehmann/erp/Palestine/palestin.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  32. ^ MorÃ§Ã¶l 2006, p. 304
  33. ^ "Palestine: The Rise of Islam". Encyclopedia Britannica. 2007. http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-45061/Palestine. Retrieved on 2007-09-19.
  34. ^ "Palestine: 'Abbasid rule". Encyclopedia Britannica. 2007. http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-45062/Palestine. Retrieved on 2007-09-19.
  35. ^ "Palestine: The Crusades". Encyclopedia Britannica. 2007. http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-45064/Palestine. Retrieved on 2007-09-19.
  36. ^ Rosenzweig, p. 1\. "Zionism, the urge of the Jewish people to return to Palestine, is almost as ancient as the Jewish diaspora itself. Some Talmudic statements... Almost a millennium later, the poet and philosopher Yehuda Halevi... In the 19th century..."
  37. ^ From the King James Version of the Bible: "For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isaiah, 2:3)
  38. ^ Gilbert 2005, p. 2\. "Jews sought a new homeland here after their expulsions from Spain (1492)..."
  39. ^ Ausubel 1964, pp. 142â4
  40. ^ a b c d "Immigration". Jewish Virtual Library. The American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise. http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Immigration/immigtoc.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-12. The source provides information on the First, Second, Third, Fourth, and Fifth Aliyot in their respective articles. The White Paper leading to Aliyah Bet is discussed [1].
  41. ^ Kornberg 1993 "How did Theodor Herzl, an assimilated German nationalist in the 1880s, suddenly in the 1890s become the founder of Zionism?"
  42. ^ Herzl 1946, p. 11
  43. ^ "Chapter One: The Heralders of Zionism". Jewish Agency for Israel. http://www.jewishagency.org/JewishAgency/English/Jewish+Education/Compelling+Content/Eye+on+Israel/120/Chapter+One+The+Heralders+of+Zionism.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-12.
  44. ^ Stein 2003, p. 88\. "As with the First Aliyah, most Second Aliyah migrants were non-Zionist orthodox Jews..."
  45. ^ Romano 2003, p. 30
  46. ^ Macintyre, Donald (2005-05-26). "The birth of modern Israel: A scrap of paper that changed history". The Independent. http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/the-birth-of-modern-israel-a-scrap-of-paper-that-changed-history-492084.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-07.
  47. ^ Scharfstein 1996, p. 269\. "During the First and Second Aliyot, there were many Arab attacks against Jewish settlements... In 1920, Hashomer was disbanded and Haganah ("The Defense") was established."
  48. ^ "League of Nations: The Mandate for Palestine, July 24, 1922". Modern History Sourcebook. Fordham University. 1922-07-24. http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1922mandate.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-27.
  49. ^ J. V. W. Shaw , "A Survey of Palestine, Vol 1: Prepared in December 1945 and January 1946 for the Information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry", Reprinted 1991 by The Institute for Palestine Studies, Washington, D.C., p.148
  50. ^ Liebreich 2005, p. 34
  51. ^ "The Population of Palestine Prior to 1948". MidEastWeb. http://www.mideastweb.org/palpop.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-12.
  52. ^ "Population Statistics". Israeli â Palestinian ProCon.org. http://www.israelipalestinianprocon.org/populationpalestine.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-12. [dead link]
  53. ^ Fraser 2004, p. 27
  54. ^ Background Paper No. 47 (ST/DPI/SER.A/47). United Nations. 1949-04-20. http://domino.un.org/UNISPAL.NSF/0a2a053971ccb56885256cef0073c6d4/2248af9a92b498718525694b007239c6!OpenDocument. Retrieved on 2007-07-31.
  55. ^ Best 2003, pp. 118â9
  56. ^ "History: Foreign Domination". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2006-10-01. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/Facts+About+Israel/History/HISTORY-+Foreign+Domination.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-06.
  57. ^ Bregman 2002, p. 40â1
  58. ^ Benny Morris 1948: A History of the First Arab-Israeli War, Yale University Press, 2008.
  59. ^ "Part 3: Partition, War and Independence". The Mideast: A Century of Conflict. National Public Radio. 2002-10-02. http://www.npr.org/news/specials/mideast/history/history3.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-13.
  60. ^ Two Hundred and Seventh Plenary Meeting. The United Nations. 1949-05-11. http://domino.un.org/UNISPAL.NSF/1ce874ab1832a53e852570bb006dfaf6/0b3ab8d2a7c0273d8525694b00726d1b. Retrieved on 2007-07-13.
  61. ^ General Progress Report and Supplementary Report of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine, Covering the Period from December 11, 1949 to October 23, 1950. The United Nations Conciliation Commission. 1950-10-23. http://domino.un.org/unispal.nsf/9a798adbf322aff38525617b006d88d7/93037e3b939746de8525610200567883. Retrieved on 2007-07-13. (U.N. General Assembly Official Records, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 18, Document A/1367/Rev. 1)
  62. ^ Van Evera, Stephen. "Nature of the Flashpoint" (PDF). Center for International Studies. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. http://web.mit.edu/cis/pdf/VanEvera_flashpointsinwar.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-09-11.
  63. ^ Reveron & Murer 2006
  64. ^ Lustick 1988, pp. 37â9
  65. ^ "Israel (Labor Zionism)". Country Studies. Library of Congress. http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/iltoc.html.
  66. ^ "Population, by Religion and Population Group". Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 2006. http://www1.cbs.gov.il/reader/shnaton/templ_shnaton_e.html?num_tab=st02_01&CYear=2006. Retrieved on 2007-08-07.
  67. ^ Shindler 2002, pp. 49â50
  68. ^ Gilbert 2005, p. 58
  69. ^ "The Suez Crisis". University of San Diego. 2005-12-05. http://history.sandiego.edu/GEN/20th/suez.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-15.
  70. ^ "Adolf Eichmann". Jewish Virtual Library. http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Holocaust/eichmann.html.
  71. ^ Cole 2003, p. 27\. "...the Eichmann trial, which did so much to raise public awareness of the Holocaust..."
  72. ^ "Justice Ministry Reply to Amnesty International Report". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 1995-07-05. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/Government/Law/Legal%20Issues%20and%20Rulings/JUSTICE%20MINISTRY%20REPLY%20TO%201995%20AMNESTY%20INTERNATION. Retrieved on 2007-08-10.
  73. ^ "Ivan the Not-So-Terrible, Monday, Aug. 02, 1993". Time. 1993-08-02. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,978969,00.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  74. ^ "Encarta - Six-Day War". Encarta - Six-Day War. Encarta.msn.com. 1967-06-05. http://encarta.msn.com/encnet/refpages/RefArticle.aspx?refid=761570433. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  75. ^ Smith 2006, p. 126\. "Nasser, the Egyptian president, decided to mass troops in the Sinai...casus belli by Israel."
  76. ^ NYTimes - The Interregnum
  77. ^ "Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs - The Palestinian National Covenant- July 1968". Mfa.gov.il. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/Foreign+Relations/Israels+Foreign+Relations+since+1947/1947-1974/33+The+Palestinian+National+Covenant-+July+1968.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  78. ^ Palestine Facts Editors. "Ma'alot, Kiryat Shmona, and Other Terrorist Targets in the 1970s". Palestinefacts.org. http://www.palestinefacts.org/pf_1967to1991_terrorism_1970s.php. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  79. ^ Andrews, Edmund L. and John Kifner."George Habash, Palestinian Terrorism Tactician, Dies at 82." The New York Times. January 27, 2008. May 12, 2008.
  80. ^ Crowdy 2006, p. 333
  81. ^ "The war of attrition". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/296740/Israel/219430/The-war-of-attrition. Retrieved on 2009-01-29.
  82. ^ "1973: Arab states attack Israeli forces". On This Day (The BBC). http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/october/6/newsid_2514000/2514317.stm. Retrieved on 2007-07-15.
  83. ^ Bregman 2002, pp. 169â70 "In hindsight we can say that 1977 was a turning point..."
  84. ^ Bregman 2002, pp. 171â4
  85. ^ Bregman 2002, pp. 186â7
  86. ^ Bregman 2002, p. 199
  87. ^ "Intifada". Encarta. Microsoft. 2007. http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_761579974/Intifada.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-16.
  88. ^ Stone & Zenner 1994, p. 246\. "Toward the end of 1991,... were the result of internal Palestinian terror."
  89. ^ Haberman, Clyde (1991-12-09). "After 4 Years, Intifada Still Smolders". The New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9D0CE7DB173EF93AA35751C1A967958260. Retrieved on 2008-03-28.
  90. ^ Mowlana, Gerbner & Schiller 1992, p. 111
  91. ^ Bregman 2002, p. 236
  92. ^ "From the End of the Cold War to 2001". Boston College. http://www.bc.edu/research/cjl/meta-elements/texts/cjrelations/resources/education/Israel_Palestine/cold_war_ends.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-16.
  93. ^ "Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements". U.S. Department of State. 1993-09-13. http://www.state.gov/p/nea/rls/22602.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-16.
  94. ^ Israel-Palestine Liberation Organization letters of recognition
  95. ^ Harkavy & Neuman 2001, p. 270\. "Even though Jordan in 1994 became the second country, after Egypt to sign a peace treaty with Israel..."
  96. ^ Settlements information, Foundation for Middle East Peace. "Sources of Population Growth: Total Israeli Population and Settler Population, 1991 - 2003". http://www.fmep.org/settlement_info/stats_data/settler_population_growth/sources_population_growth_1991-2003.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-12. [dead link]
  97. ^ Bregman 2002, p. 257
  98. ^ "The Wye River Memorandum". U.S. Department of State. 1998-10-23. http://www.state.gov/p/nea/rls/22694.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-16.
  99. ^ Gelvin 2005, p. 240
  100. ^ "West Bank barrier route disputed, Israeli missile kills 2". The Associated Press (via USA Today). 2004-07-29. http://www.usatoday.com/news/world/2004-07-29-west-bank_x.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-16.
  101. ^ 'Permanent Ceasefire to Be Based on Creation Of Buffer Zone Free of Armed Personnel Other than UN, Lebanese Forces' United Nations Security Council, August 11, 2006  
\- escalation of hostilities in Lebanon and in Israel since Hizbollahâs
attack on Israel on July 12, 2006

  102. ^ Harel, Amos (July 13, 2006). "Hezbollah kills 8 soldiers, kidnaps two in offensive on northern border". Haaretz. http://www.haaretz.com/hasen/pages/ShArt.jhtml?itemNo=737825. Retrieved on 2006-08-13.
  103. ^ Kessler, Glenn; Robin Wright. "Israel, U.S. Shared Data On Suspected Nuclear Site". The Washington Post. ISSN 0740-5421. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/09/20/AR2007092002701.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-29.
  104. ^ Walker, Peter; News Agencies (2008-05-21). "Olmert confirms peace talks with Syria" (in English). The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2008/may/21/israelandthepalestinians.syria. Retrieved on 2008-05-21. "Israel and Syria are holding indirect peace talks, with Turkey acting as a mediator..."
  105. ^ "Q&A: Gaza conflict". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/7818022.stm. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  106. ^ Associated Free Press (2008-12-29). "Israeli jets pound Hamas" (in English). The Sydney Morning Herald. http://www.smh.com.au/news/world/israeli-jets-pound-hamas/2008/12/29/1230399085970.html?page=fullpage#contentSwap1. Retrieved on 2008-12-29.
  107. ^ Koutsoukis, Jason (5/1/9). "Battleground Gaza: Israeli ground forces invade the strip" (in English). smh.com.au. http://www.smh.com.au/news/world/battleground-gaza/2009/01/04/1231003847085.html. Retrieved on 5/1/9.
  108. ^ Ravid, Barak (2009-01-19). "IDF begins Gaza troop withdrawal, hours after ending 3-week offensive". Haaretz. http://www.haaretz.com/hasen/spages/1056246.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-29.
  109. ^ Azoulay, Yuval (2009-02-01). "Two IDF soldiers, civilian lightly hurt as Gaza mortars hit Negev". Haaretz. http://haaretz.com/hasen/spages/1060562.html. Retrieved on 2009-04-12.
  110. ^ "Area of Districts, Sub-Districts, Natural Regions and Lakes" (PDF). Statistical Abstract of Israel. Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 2006. http://www1.cbs.gov.il/shnaton57/st01_01.pdf.
  111. ^ "Israel (Geography)". Country Studies. The Library of Congress. http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/iltoc.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-20.
  112. ^ "The Living Dead Sea". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 1999-04-01. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/MFAArchive/1990_1999/1999/4/FOCUS%20on%20Israel-%20The%20Living%20Dead%20Sea. Retrieved on 2007-07-20.
  113. ^ "Makhteshim Country". UNESCO. http://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists/1486/. Retrieved on 2007-09-19.
  114. ^ Jacobs 1998, p. 284\. "The extraordinary Makhtesh Ramon â the largest natural crater in the world..."
  115. ^ "Ramon R&D Center". Ben-Gurion University of the Negev. http://www.bgu.ac.il/desert_ecology/ramon/. Retrieved on 2007-09-19. [dead link]
  116. ^ Rinat, Zafrir (2008-06-02). "More endangered than rain forests?". Haaretz. http://www.haaretz.com/hasen/spages/988204.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  117. ^ Goldreich 2003, p. 85
  118. ^ Watzman, Haim (1997-02-08). "Left for dead". http://environment.newscientist.com/article/mg15320684.400-left-for-dead--plans-to-rescue-the-rapidly-shrinking-dead-sea-may-be-good-news-forindustry-and-tourists-but-the-strange-life-forms-that-thrive-in-its-supersaltywaters-still-face-a-perilous-future-says-ithaim-watzmanit.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  119. ^ "Average Weather for Tel Aviv-Yafo". The Weather Channel. http://www.weather.com/outlook/travel/businesstraveler/wxclimatology/monthly/graph/ISXX0026. Retrieved on 2007-07-11.
  120. ^ "Average Weather for Jerusalem". The Weather Channel. http://www.weather.com/outlook/events/weddings/wxclimatology/monthly/graph/ISXX0010. Retrieved on 2007-07-11.
  121. ^ Sitton, Dov (2003-09-20). "Development of Limited Water Resources- Historical and Technological Aspects". Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs. http://www.mfa.gov.il/mfa/facts%20about%20israel/land/focus%20on%20israel-%20development%20of%20limited%20water%20reso. Retrieved on 2007-11-07.
  122. ^ Grossman, Gershon; Ayalon, Ofira; Baron, Yifaat; Kaufman, Debby. "Solar energy for the production of heat". Samuel Neaman Institute. http://www.neaman.org.il/neaman/publications/publication_item.asp?fid=590&parent_fid=490&iid=3639. Retrieved on 2007-11-07.
  123. ^ a b "Field Listing â Executive Branch". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 2007-06-19. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/fields/2077.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-20.
  124. ^ In the 1990s, direct elections for Prime Minister were inaugurated but the system was declared unsatisfactory and the old one was brought back.
  125. ^ "The Electoral System in Israel". The Knesset. http://www.knesset.gov.il/description/eng/eng_mimshal_beh.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-08.
  126. ^ Migdalovitz, Carol (2007-07-06). "Israel: Background and Relations with the United States" (PDF). Congressional Research Service (via the U.S. Mission to Italy). 23. http://italy.usembassy.gov/pdf/other/RL33476.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-02-20.
  127. ^ Mazie 2006, p. 34
  128. ^ a b "The Judiciary: The Court System". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2005-08-01. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/Government/Branches%20of%20Government/Judicial/The%20Judiciary-%20The%20Court%20System. Retrieved on 2007-08-05.
  129. ^ "Israelâs high court unique in region". The Boston Herald. 2007-09-09. http://www.bostonherald.com/news/opinion/editorial/view.bg?articleid=1030205. Retrieved on 2007-09-15.
  130. ^ "Israel and the International Criminal Court". Office of the Legal Adviser to the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2002-06-30. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/MFAArchive/2000_2009/2002/6/Israel%20and%20the%20International%20Criminal%20Court. Retrieved on 2007-07-20.
  131. ^ "The State â Judiciary â The Court System". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2006-10-01. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/Facts+About+Israel/State/THE+STATE-+Judiciary-+The+Court+System.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-09.
  132. ^ "Press Freedom Rankings by Region 2007". Freedom House. 2007. http://www.freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=202&year=2005. Retrieved on 2007-06-12.
  133. ^ "Worldwide Press Freedom Index 2006". Reporters Without Borders. http://www.rsf.org/rubrique.php3?id_rubrique=639. Retrieved on 2007-07-19.
  134. ^ "Israel and the Occupied Territories". Amnesty International Report 2006. Amnesty International. 2006. http://web.amnesty.org/report2006/isr-summary-eng. Retrieved on 2007-07-20. [dead link]
  135. ^ "Israel/Palestinian Authority". Human Rights Watch. http://hrw.org/doc/?t=mideast&c=isrlpa. Retrieved on 2007-07-20.
  136. ^ "Land Grab: Israel's Settlement Policy in the West Bank". B'Tselem. May 2002. http://www.btselem.org/English/Publications/Summaries/200205_Land_Grab.asp. Retrieved on 2007-08-09.
  137. ^ "Introduction to the Tables: Geophysical Characteristics" (doc). Central Bureau of Statistics. http://www.cbs.gov.il/shnaton53/download/st_eng01.doc. Retrieved on 2007-09-04.
  138. ^ "Localities, Population, and Density" (PDF). http://www1.cbs.gov.il/shnaton57/st02_15.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-07-02.
  139. ^ "Press Release: Jerusalem Day" (PDF). Central Bureau of Statistics. 2006-05-24. http://www.cbs.gov.il/hodaot2006n/11_06_106e.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-03-10.
  140. ^ "Population of Localities numbering above 1,000 residents and other rural population on 31/12/2006" (PDF). Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. 2006-12-31. http://www.cbs.gov.il/population/new_2007/table3.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-04-29.
  141. ^ "Olmert: Willing to trade land for peace". Ynetnews. 2006-12-16. http://www.ynetnews.com/articles/0,7340,L-3340641,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-26.
  142. ^ "Syria ready to discuss land for peace". The Jerusalem Post. June 12, 2007. http://www.jpost.com/servlet/Satellite?cid=1181570258086&pagename=JPost%2FJPArticle%2FShowFull. Retrieved on 2007-09-26.
  143. ^ "Egypt: Israel must accept the land-for-peace formula". The Jerusalem Post. May 15, 2007. http://www.jpost.com/servlet/Satellite?pagename=JPost/JPArticle/ShowFull&cid=1173879095966. Retrieved on 2007-09-26.
  144. ^ "UNRWA in Figures: Figures as of December 31, 2004" (PDF). United Nations. April 2005. http://www.un.org/unrwa/publications/pdf/uif-dec04.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-09-27.
  145. ^ "Questions and Answers". Israelâs Security Fence. The State of Israel. February 22, 2004. http://www.securityfence.mod.gov.il/Pages/ENG/questions.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-17.
  146. ^ "Under the Guise of Security: Routing the Separation Barrier to Enable Israeli Settlement Expansion in the West Bank". Publications. B'Tselem. December 2005. http://www.btselem.org/english/Publications/summaries/200512_Under_the_Guise_of_Security.asp. Retrieved on 2007-04-16.
  147. ^ for details of Israel's control see http://www.btselem.org/english/Gaza_Strip/Gaza_Status.asp
  148. ^ http://www.eubam-rafah.eu/portal/ and http://www.eubam-rafah.eu/portal/files/aprc.pdf
  149. ^ "B'Tselem - The Gaza Strip - 30 July 2007: Joint call by human rights groups to open the Rafah border crossing". Btselem.org. http://www.btselem.org/english/Gaza_Strip/20070730_Joint_call_to_open_Rafah_Crossing.asp. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  150. ^ "Israel's Diplomatic Missions Abroad: Status of Relations". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2006-07-12. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/About%20the%20Ministry/Diplomatic%20missions/Israel-s%20Diplomatic%20Missions%20Abroad. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  151. ^ "Israel Among the Nations: Middle East â North Africa". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2006-10-01. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/Foreign+Relations/Israel+Among+the+Nations/ISRAEL%20AMONG%20THE%20NATIONS-%20Middle%20East%20-%20North%20Afri. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  152. ^ "Israel sees Morocco as mediator". BBC News. 2003-09-02. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/3202767.stm. Retrieved on 2007-09-28.
  153. ^ "Initial Periodic Report of the State of Israel Concerning the Implementation of the Convention of the Rights of the Child (CRC)" (PDF). Israel Ministry of Justice. February 2001. 147 (173 using pdf numbering). http://www.justice.gov.il/NR/rdonlyres/129A5B6A-20D6-4C3B-9785-1C6B6763394A/0/CRCengfull.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-08-09.
  154. ^ (Hebrew) "×××¨×××ª ×××× ×××©×¨×××". Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2004. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFAHeb/MFAArchive/2004/horaot+din+israeli0304.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-09.
  155. ^ "Week of 8-March 14, 2000". North Atlantic Treaty Organization. 2001-09-13. http://www.nato.int/docu/update/2000/0308/eng.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-21.
  156. ^ Migdalovitz, Carol (2007-07-06). "Israel: Background and Relations with the United States" (PDF). Congressional Research Service (via the U.S. Mission to Italy). 23. http://italy.usembassy.gov/pdf/other/RL33476.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-09-23.
  157. ^ Abadi 2004, p. 3\. "However, it was not until 1991 that the two countries established full diplomatic relations."
  158. ^ Abadi 2004, pp. 4-6
  159. ^ "Germany and Israel". Background Papers. German Embassy, Washington, D.C.. http://www.germany.info/relaunch/info/archives/background/israel.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-23.
  160. ^ "Israel welcomes new Germany to a celebration of its 60th birthday". Times Online. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/world/middle_east/article3564572.ece. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  161. ^ Kumar, Dinesh. "India and Israel: Dawn of a New Era". Jerusalem Institute for Western Defense. http://www.westerndefense.org/bulletins/Dec-01.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-23.
  162. ^ "UK and Israel". Background Papers. Uk Foreign and Commonwealth Office.. http://www.fco.gov.uk/servlet/Front?pagename=OpenMarket/Xcelerate/ShowPage&c=Page&cid=1007029394365&a=KCountryProfile&aid=1031532656768. Retrieved on 2007-12-19.
  163. ^ Abadi 2004, pp. 37-9, 47
  164. ^ Abadi 2004, pp. 47-9
  165. ^ "History: 1948". Israel Defense Forces. 2007. http://dover.idf.il/IDF/English/about/History/40s/1948/default.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-31.
  166. ^ Henderson 2003, p. 97
  167. ^ "The State: Israel Defense Forces (IDF)". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2009-03-13. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/Facts+About+Israel/State/THE+STATE-+Israel+Defense+Forces+-IDF-.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-09.
  168. ^ "Israel Defense Forces". GlobalSecurity.org. http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/israel/idf.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-16.
  169. ^ "The Israel Defense Forces". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/Facts%20About%20Israel/State/The%20Israel%20Defense%20Forces. Retrieved on 2006-10-21.
  170. ^ Stendel 1997, pp. 191â2
  171. ^ Shtrasler, Nehemia (2007-05-16). "Cool law, for wrong population". Haaretz. http://www.haaretz.com/hasen/pages/ArticleContent.jhtml?itemNo=860256. Retrieved on 2007-07-21.
  172. ^ "Sherut Leumi (National Service)". Nefesh B'Nefesh. 2007-07-04. http://www.nbn.org.il/students/sherut_leumi.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-31.
  173. ^ Wheeler, Carolynne (2007-09-06). "Stars take the shine off military service". The Globe and Mail. http://www.theglobeandmail.com/servlet/story/LAC.20070906.DRAFT06/TPStory/TPInternational/Africa/. Retrieved on 2007-09-16.
  174. ^ a b Erlanger, Steven (2007-08-17). "Israel to Get $30 Billion in Military Aid From U.S.". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/08/17/world/middleeast/17israel.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-23.
  175. ^ Katz, Yaakov (2007-03-30). "'Arrow can fully protect against Iran'". The Jerusalem Post. http://www.jpost.com/servlet/Satellite?cid=1173879211495&pagename=JPost%2FJPArticle%2FShowFull. Retrieved on 2007-09-16.
  176. ^ Zorn, E. L. (2007-05-08). "Israel's Quest for Satellite Intelligence". Central Intelligence Agency. https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/kent-csi/docs/v44i5a04p.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-16.
  177. ^ Katz, Yaakov (2007-06-11). "Analysis: Eyes in the sky". The Jerusalem Post. http://www.jpost.com/servlet/Satellite?cid=1181570245958&pagename=JPost%2FJPArticle%2FShowFull. Retrieved on 2007-09-16.
  178. ^ Seitz, Charmaine (2001-01-30). "Israelâs Defense Budget: The Business Side of War". The Jerusalem Fund. http://www.thejerusalemfund.org/www.thejerusalemfund.org/carryover/pubs/20010130ib.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-16. (first appeared in Information Brief No. 64)
  179. ^ Mohamed ElBaradei (2004-07-27). "Transcript of the Director General's Interview with Al-Ahram News". International Atomic Energy Agency. http://www.iaea.org/NewsCenter/Transcripts/2004/alahram27072004.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-19.
  180. ^ "Israel Homeowner Glossary". Israelhomeowner.com. 2007-01-03. http://www.israelhomeowner.com/Glossary.asp. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  181. ^ "Economy Rankings â Middle East & North Africa". The World Bank Group. http://www.doingbusiness.org/economyrankings/default.aspx?regionid=4. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  182. ^ "NASDAQ Appoints Asaf Homossany as New Director for Israel". NASDAQ. 2005-02-06. http://www.nasdaq.com/newsroom/news/pr2005/ne_section05_019.stm. Retrieved on 2007-08-04.
  183. ^ "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". Imf.org. 2006-09-14. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/01/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2008&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=436&s=NGDP_R%2CNGDP_RPCH%2CNGDP%2CNGDPD%2CNGDP_D%2CNGDPRPC%2CNGDPPC%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CPPPSH%2CPPPEX%2CPCPI%2CPCPIPCH%2CPCPIE%2CPCPIEPCH%2CLUR%2CLE%2CLP%2CGGB%2CGGB_NGDP%2CBCA%2CBCA_NGDPD&grp=0&a=&pr1.x=38&pr1.y=7. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  184. ^ "Israel invited to join the OECD". Ynet News. 2007-05-16. http://www.ynetnews.com/articles/0,7340,L-3400955,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-04.
  185. ^ "About". Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. http://www.oecd.org/about/. Retrieved on 2007-08-04.
  186. ^ Ginsburg, Mitch (2007-05-28). "A Hotter Holy Land". The Jerusalem Report. http://pqasb.pqarchiver.com/jrep/access/1271587481.html?dids=1271587481:1271587481&FMT=ABS&FMTS=ABS:FT&date=May+28%2C+2007&author=Mitch+Ginsburg&pub=The+Jerusalem+Report&edition=&startpage=13&de/. Retrieved on 2007-08-30.
  187. ^ "Israel keen on IT tie-ups". The Hindu Business Line. 2001-01-10. http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/businessline/2001/01/11/stories/151139ue.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-04.
  188. ^ "Israel: Punching above its weight". Economist. 2005-11-14. http://www.ebusinessforum.com/index.asp?doc_id=7798&layout=rich_story. Retrieved on 2007-08-04.
  189. ^ Krawitz, Avi (2007-02-27). "Intel to expand Jerusalem R&D". The Jerusalem Post. http://www.jpost.com/servlet/Satellite?cid=1171894528658&pagename=JPost%2FJPArticle%2FShowFull. Retrieved on 2007-08-04.
  190. ^ "Israel R&D Center: Leadership Team". Microsoft. http://www.microsoft.com/Israel/RnD/about/team.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-04.
  191. ^ "Buffet ready to buy a 'big business'". IHT. http://www.iht.com/articles/2007/05/06/bloomberg/bxwarren.php.
  192. ^ Burstein, Nathan (2007-08-14). "Tourist visits above pre-war level". The Jerusalem Post. http://www.jpost.com/servlet/Satellite?cid=1186557443251&pagename=JPost%2FJPArticle%2FShowFull. Retrieved on 2007-09-04.
  193. ^ "Pope to visit Holy Land". Haaretz.com. http://www.haaretz.com/hasen/spages/1069604.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  194. ^ "Comparing Education Statistics Across the World" (PDF). Global Education Digest 2004. UNESCO Institute for Statistics. 2004. 75, 77. http://www.unesco.org/education/docs/EN_GD2004_v2.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-08-04.
  195. ^ "Human Development Indicators" (PDF). Human Development Report 2005. United Nations. 2005. Archived from the original on 2007-07-02. http://web.archive.org/web/20070702184520/http://hdr.undp.org/reports/global/2005/pdf/HDR05_HDI.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-08-04.
  196. ^ "ED250227 - Israeli Schools: Religious and Secular Problems". Eric.ed.gov. 1984-10-10. http://www.eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/custom/portlets/recordDetails/detailmini.jsp?_nfpb=true&_&ERICExtSearch_SearchValue_0=ED250227&ERICExtSearch_SearchType_0=eric_accno&accno=ED250227. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  197. ^ Kashti, Or; Shahar Ilan (2007-07-19). "Knesset raises school dropout age to 18". Haaretz. http://www.haaretz.com/hasen/spages/883341.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-05.
  198. ^ "Summary of the Principal Laws Related to Education". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2003-01-26. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/MFAArchive/2000_2009/2003/1/Summary+of+the+principal+laws+relating+to+educatio.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-04.
  199. ^ a b "Education" (PDF). Ministry of Immigrant Absorption. http://www.moia.gov.il/NR/rdonlyres/9FBC4448-CB15-4309-BA82-96DC681E7A11/0/education_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-08-05.
  200. ^ "The Israeli Matriculation Certificate". United States-Israel Educational Foundation via the University of Szeged University Library. January 1996. http://www.bibl.u-szeged.hu/oseas/bagrut.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-05.
  201. ^ "Pupils in Grade XII, matriculation examinees and entitled to a certificate" (PDF). Central Bureau of Statistics. http://www1.cbs.gov.il/shnaton56/st08_21.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-07-02.
  202. ^ Giant solar plants in Negev could power Israel's future, John Lettice, The Register, January 25, 2008
  203. ^ "Higher Education in Israel". Embassy of Israel in Washington, DC. http://www.israelemb.org/highered/highed.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-10.
  204. ^ "About the Library". Jewish National and University Library. http://www.jnul.huji.ac.il/eng/history.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-05.
  205. ^ "Top 500 World Universities (1-100)". Institute of Higher Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 2006. http://ed.sjtu.edu.cn/rank/2006/ARWU2006_Top100.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-02.
  206. ^ "The World's Top 200 Universities". International Comparisons. Times Higher Education Supplement. 2006-10-06. http://www.thes.co.uk/statistics/international_comparisons/2006/top_unis.aspx?window_type=popup. Retrieved on 2007-08-04. [dead link]
  207. ^ "Top 500 World Universities". Institute of Higher Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 2006. http://ed.sjtu.edu.cn/rank/2006/ARWU2006TOP500list.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-01.
  208. ^ a b "Top Ten Reasons to Invest in Israel". Israeli Consulate, New York City. Archived from the original on 2007-07-16. http://web.archive.org/web/20070716015552/http://www.israelfm.org/economic/investing/top_ten.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-01.
  209. ^ "Israel: IT Workforce". Information Technology Landscape in Nations Around the World. American University. http://www.american.edu/initeb/as5415a/Israel_ICT/itWork.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  210. ^ "Israeli professor shares Nobel Prize in Economics for 2005". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2005-10-05. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/Israel+beyond+politics/Israeli+professor+shares+Nobel+Prize+in+Economics+for+2005+10-Oct-2005.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  211. ^ Heylin, Michael (2006-11-27). "Globalization Of Science Rolls On". Chemical & Engineering News (American Chemical Society): pp. 26â31. http://pubs.acs.org/cen/science/84/8448sci1.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-21.
  212. ^ Gordon, Evelyn (2006-08-24). "Kicking the global oil habit". The Jerusalem Post. http://www.jpost.com/servlet/Satellite?cid=1154525933299&pagename=JPost%2FJPArticle%2FPrinter. Retrieved on 2007-08-04.
  213. ^ a b Israel Pushes Solar Energy Technology, Linda Gradstein, National Public Radio, October 22, 2007.
  214. ^ a b At the Zenith of Solar Energy, Neal Sandler,BusinessWeek, March 26, 2008.
  215. ^ a b Looking to the sun, Tom Parry, Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, August 15, 2007.
  216. ^ Del Chiaro, Bernadette. "Solar Water Heating (How California Can Reduce Its Dependence on Natural Gas)" (PDF). Environment California Research and Policy Center. http://www.environmentcalifornia.org/uploads/at/56/at563bKwmfrtJI6fKl9U_w/Solar-Water-Heating.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-09-29.
  217. ^ Bright ideas, Ehud Zion Waldoks, Jerusalem Post, October 1, 2008.
  218. ^ Israeli Section of the International Solar Energy Society, edited by Gershon Grossman, Faculty of Mechanical Energy, Technion, Haifa; Final draft.
  219. ^ Lazaroff, Tovah (2007-01-10). "Report: 12,400 new settlers in 2006". The Jerusalem Post. http://www.jpost.com/servlet/Satellite?c=JPArticle&cid=1167467697743&pagename=JPost%2FJPArticle%2FShowFull. Retrieved on 2007-08-06.
  220. ^ "Settlements in the West Bank". Settlement Information. Foundation for Middle East Peace. http://www.fmep.org/settlement_info/stats_data/west_bank_settlements.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-12. [dead link]
  221. ^ "Israeli Settler Population 1972-2006". Settlement Information. Foundation for Middle East Peace. http://www.fmep.org/settlement_info/stats_data/settler_populations/Israeli_settler_population_in_occupied_territories.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-12. [dead link]
  222. ^ "Settlements in the Golan Heights". Settlement Information. Foundation for Middle East Peace. http://www.fmep.org/settlement_info/stats_data/golan_heights_settlements.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-12. [dead link]
  223. ^ "Settlements in East Jerusalem". Settlement Information. Foundation for Middle East Peace. http://www.fmep.org/settlement_info/stats_data/east_jerusalem_settlements.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-12. [dead link]
  224. ^ "Settlements in the Gaza Strip". Settlement Information. Foundation for Middle East Peace. http://www.fmep.org/settlement_info/stats_data/gaza_strip_settlements.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-12. [dead link]
  225. ^ Friedberg, Rachel M. (November 2001). "The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 1373. doi:10.1162/003355301753265606. http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/003355301753265606?journalCode=qjec.
  226. ^ Adriana Kemp, "Labour migration and racialisation: labour market mechanisms and labour migration control policies in Israel", Social Identities 10:2, 267-292, 2004
  227. ^ DellaPergola, Sergio (2000) [2000]. Still Moving: Recent Jewish Migration in Comparative Perspective, Daniel J. Elazar and Morton Weinfeld eds.. ed (in English). âThe Global Context of Migration to Israelâ. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. pp. 13â60. ISBN 1-56000-428-2.
  228. ^ Herman, Pini (September 1983), "The Myth of the Israeli Expatriate", Moment Magazine 8 (8): 62â63
  229. ^ Gould, Eric; Moav, Omer (2006) (in Hebrew) (PDF), Brain Drain From Israel (Brichat Mochot M'Yisrael), Jerusalem: Mercaz Shalem â The Shalem Center, The Social-Economic Institute, p. 26, http://www.shalem.org.il/Admin/FileServer/df4b061c96a6fbceb95026260cb4de8a.pdf
  230. ^ Rettig, Haviv (2008-04-06). "Officials to US to bring Israelis home" (in English). Jerusalem Post (Jerusalem Post). http://www.jpost.com/servlet/Satellite?pagename=JPost%2FJPArticle%2FShowFull&cid=1207238165607. Retrieved on 2008-04-29.
  231. ^ "The Law of Return". Knesset. http://www.knesset.gov.il/laws/special/eng/return.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  232. ^ Central Bureau of Statistics, Government of Israel. "Jews and others, by origin, continent of birth and period of immigration" (PDF). http://www1.cbs.gov.il/shnaton56/st02_24.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-04-08.
  233. ^ Elazar, Daniel J.. "Religion in Israel: A Consensus for Jewish Tradition". Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs. http://www.jcpa.org/dje/articles2/relinisr-consensus.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-06.
  234. ^ Central Bureau of Statistics, Government of Israel. "Population, by religion and population group" (PDF). http://www1.cbs.gov.il/shnaton56/st02_01.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-08-06.
  235. ^ "National Population Estimates" (PDF). Central Bureau of Statistics. 27. http://www.cbs.gov.il/shnaton53/st_eng02.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-08-06.
  236. ^ Bassok, Moti (2006-12-25). "Israel's Christian population numbers 148,000 as of Christmas Eve". Haaretz. http://www.haaretz.com/hasen/spages/805277.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  237. ^ "The BahÃ¡'Ã­ World Centre: Focal Point for a Global Community". The BahÃ¡'Ã­ International Community. http://info.bahai.org/article-1-6-0-5.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-02.
  238. ^ "Teaching the Faith in Israel". BahÃ¡'Ã­ Library Online. 1995-06-23. http://bahai-library.com/index.php5?file=uhj_teaching_in_israel.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-06.
  239. ^ "Immigration and Social and Cultural Diversity Among the Jewish Population". International Youth Foundation. http://www.iyfnet.org/document.cfm/92/97/243. Retrieved on 2007-09-06.
  240. ^ "Jewish Festivals and Days of Remembrance in Israel". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/Facts%20About%20Israel/People/Jewish%20Festivals%20in%20Israel. Retrieved on 2007-09-16.
  241. ^ Ran, Ami (1998-08-25). "Encounters: The Vernacular Paradox of Israeli Architecture". Ministry of Foreign Affairs. http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/MFA+Publications/Photo+exhibits/Encounters-+The+Vernacular+Paradox+of+Israeli+Arch-+Intro.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-06. [dead link]
  242. ^ Brinn, David (2005-10-23). "Israeli, Palestinian and Jordanian DJs create bridge for peace". Israel21c. http://www.israel21c.org/bin/en.jsp?enDispWho=Articles%5El1126&enPage=BlankPage&enDisplay=view&enDispWhat=object&enVersion=0&enZone=Culture. Retrieved on 2007-09-16.
  243. ^ Dolev, Yael. "Some Thoughts About Israeli Cuisine". University of Michigan Integrative Medicine. The University of Michigan. http://www.med.umich.edu/umim/clinical/pyramid/global.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-06.
  244. ^ "Depositing Books to The Jewish National & University Library". Jewish National and University Library. http://jnul.huji.ac.il/eng/lgd.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-21.
  245. ^ "Israeli Book Statistics for 2006". Jewish National and University Library. http://jnul.huji.ac.il/eng/lgd-statistics-2007.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-12.
  246. ^ "The Nobel Prize in Literature 1966". Nobel Foundation. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1966/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-12.
  247. ^ Broughton, Ellingham & Trillo 1999, p. 365â9
  248. ^ "Israel". World Music. National Geographic Society. http://worldmusic.nationalgeographic.com/worldmusic/view/page.basic/country/content.country/israel_36. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  249. ^ "Israeli Folk". World Music. National Geographic Society. http://worldmusic.nationalgeographic.com/worldmusic/view/page.basic/genre/content.genre/israeli_folk_735. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  250. ^ "Israel (country)". Encarta. Microsoft. 2007. http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_761575008_4/Israel.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  251. ^ Davis, Barry (2007-02-05). "Israel Philharmonic Orchestra celebrates 70th anniversary". Ministry of Foreign Affairs (from Israel21c). http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/Israel+beyond+politics/Israel+Philharmonic+Orchestra+celebrates+70th+anniversary+5-Feb-2007.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  252. ^ "Israel". Eurovision Song Contest. Eurovision Broadcasting Union. Archived from the original on 2007-06-22. http://web.archive.org/web/20070622035651/http://www.eurovision.tv/content/view/537/1. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  253. ^ "About Us". Red Sea Jazz Festival. Archived from the original on 2007-08-12. http://web.archive.org/web/20070812185754/http://www.redseajazzeilat.com/EN/aboutus.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  254. ^ (Hebrew) "××ª××××¨×× ×××××× ×××××". Habima National Theatre. http://www.habima.co.il/. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  255. ^ a b "About the Museum". The Israel Museum, Jerusalem. http://www.imj.org.il/eng/about/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  256. ^ "Shrine of the Book". The Israel Museum, Jerusalem. http://www.imj.org.il/eng/shrine/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  257. ^ "About Yad Vashem: The Yad Vashem Library". Yad Vashem. http://www1.yadvashem.org/about_yad/index_about_yad.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  258. ^ "Museum Information". Beth Hatefutsoth. http://www.bh.org.il/information/BethHatefutsoth.asp. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  259. ^ TravelNet in cooperation with Israel museums. "Mishkan LeOmanut, Ein Harod". Ilmuseums.com. http://www.ilmuseums.com/museum_eng.asp?id=183. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  260. ^ Griver, Simon (June 1999). "Sports in Israel". Jewish Virtual Library. http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Society_&_Culture/sports.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  261. ^ Torstrick 2004, p. 141\. "The two most popular spectator sports in Israel are soccer and basketball."
  262. ^ Sadec, People, Guardian.
  263. ^ "Basketball Super League Profile". Winner Basketball Super League. http://www.bsl.org.il/defaultE.asp?lang=en. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  264. ^ Bouskila, Daniel (2005-05-13). "Israel Wins More Than Hoop Crown". The Jewish Journal. http://www.jewishjournal.com/opinion/article/israel_wins_more_than_hoop_crown_20050513/. Retrieved on 2007-08-21.
  265. ^ "World Team Championship in Beer Sheva, Israel". World Chess Federation. 2005-11-01. http://www.fide.com/component/content/article/9-other/2182-673-world-team-championship-in-beer-sheva-israel. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  266. ^ Levy, Marissa (2007-10-01). "Local grandmaster takes second place at World Chess Championship". The Jerusalem Post. http://www.jpost.com/servlet/Satellite?pagename=JPost%2FJPArticle%2FShowFull&cid=1191257206613. Retrieved on 2007-10-11.
  267. ^ "Olympic Medal Winners (under Europe / Israel)". International Olympic Committee. http://www.olympic.org/uk/athletes/results/search_r_uk.asp. Retrieved on 2007-08-13.
  268. ^ "Tel Aviv 1968". International Paralympic Committee. http://www.paralympic.org/release/Main_Sections_Menu/Paralympic_Games/Past_Games/Tel_Aviv_1968/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-20.

## Bibliography

  * Abadi, Jacob (2004), Israel's Quest for Recognition and Acceptance in Asia: Garrison State Diplomacy, Routledge, ISBN 0714655767
  * Ausubel, Natan (1964), The Book of Jewish Knowledge, New York, New York: Crown Publishers, ISBN 051709746X
  * Barton, John; Bowden, Julie (2004), The Original Story: God, Israel and the World, Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, ISBN 0802829007
  * Barzilai, Gad (1996), Wars, Internal Conflicts, and Political Order: A Jewish Democracy in the Middle East, State University of New York Press, ISBN 0-7914-2943-1
  * Best, Anthony (2003), International History of the Twentieth Century, Routledge, ISBN 0415207398
  * Bregman, Ahron (2002), A History of Israel, Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 0333676319
  * Broughton, Simon; Ellingham, Mark; Trillo, Richard (1999), World Music: The Rough Guide, Rough Guides, ISBN 1858286352
  * Cole, Tim (2003), Holocaust City: The Making of a Jewish Ghetto, Routledge, ISBN 0415929687
  * Crowdy, Terry (2006), The Enemy Within: A History of Espionage, Osprey Publishing, ISBN 1841769339
  * Dekmejian, R. Hrair (1975), Patterns of Political Leadership: Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, State University of New York Press, ISBN 087395291X
  * Friedland, Roger; Hecht, Richard (2000), To Rule Jerusalem, University of California Press, ISBN 0520220927
  * Gelvin, James L. (2005), The Israel-Palestine Conflict: One Hundred Years of War, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0521852897
  * Gilbert, Martin (2005), The Routledge Atlas Of The Arab-Israeli Conflict (8th ed.), Routledge, ISBN 0415359007
  * Goldreich, Yair (2003), The Climate of Israel: Observation, Research and Application, Springer, ISBN 030647445X
  * Hamilton, Victor P. (1995), The Book of Genesis (2nd revised ed.), Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, ISBN 0802823092
  * Harkavy, Robert E.; Neuman, Stephanie G. (2001), Warfare and the Third World, Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 0312240120
  * Henderson, Robert D'A. (2003), Brassey's International Intelligence Yearbook (2003 ed.), Brassey's Inc., ISBN 1574885502
  * Herzl, Theodor (1946), The Jewish State, American Zionist Emergency Council, ISBN 0486258491
  * Jacobs, Daniel (1988), Israel and the Palestinian Territories: The Rough Guide (2nd revised ed.), Rough Guides, ISBN 1858282489
  * Kellerman, Aharon (1993), Society and Settlement: Jewish Land of Israel in the Twentieth Century, State University of New York Press, ISBN 0791412954
  * Kornberg, Jacques (1993), Theodor Herzl: From Assimilation to Zionism, Indiana University Press, ISBN 0253332036
  * Liebreich, Fritz (2005), Britain's Naval and Political Reaction to the Illegal Immigration of Jews to Palestine, 1945â1948, Routledge, ISBN 0714656372
  * Lustick, Ian (1988), For the Land and the Lord: Jewish Fundamentalism in Israel, Council on Foreign Relations Press, ISBN 0876090366
  * Mazie, Steven (2006), Israel's Higher Law: Religion and Liberal Democracy in the Jewish State, Lexington Books, ISBN 0739114859
  * MorÃ§Ã¶l, GÃ¶ktuÄ (2006), Handbook of Decision Making, CRC Press, ISBN 1574445480
  * Mowlana, Hamid; Gerbner, George; Schiller, Herbert I. (1992), Triumph of the Image: The Media's War in the Persian Gulf â A Global Perspective, Westview Press, ISBN 0813316103
  * Romano, Amy (2003), A Historical Atlas of Israel, The Rosen Publishing Group, ISBN 0823939782
  * Reveron, Derek S.; Murer, Jeffrey Stevenson (2006), Flashpoints in the War on Terrorism, Routledge, ISBN 0415954908
  * Rosenzweig, Rafael (1997), The Economic Consequences of Zionism, T Brill Academic Publishers, ISBN 9004091475
  * Rummel, Rudolph J. (1997), Power Kills: Democracy As a Method of Nonviolence, Transaction Publishers, ISBN 0765805235
  * Scharfstein, Sol (1996), Understanding Jewish History, KTAV Publishing House, ISBN 0881255459
  * Shindler, Colin (2002), The Land Beyond Promise: Israel, Likud and the Zionist Dream, I.B.Tauris Publishers, ISBN 186064774X
  * Skolnik, Fred (2007), Encyclopedia Judaica, 9 (2nd ed.), Macmillian, ISBN 0028659287
  * Smith, Derek (2006), Deterring America: Rogue States and the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0521864658
  * Stein, Leslie (2003), The Hope Fulfilled: The Rise of Modern Israel, Greenwood Press, ISBN 0275971414
  * Stendel, Ori (1997), The Arabs in Israel, Sussex Academic Press, ISBN 1898723230
  * Stone, Russell A.; Zenner, Walter P. (1994), Critical Essays on Israeli Social Issues and Scholarship, SUNY Press, ISBN 0791419592
  * Torstrick, Rebecca L. (2004), Culture and Customs of Israel, Greenwood Press, ISBN 0313320918
  * Wenham, Gordon J. (1994), Word Biblical Commentary, 2 (Genesis 16-50), Dallas, Texas: Word Books, ISBN 0849902010

## External links

Find more about Israel on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG> Definitions from
Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

Government

  * (Hebrew) Israel Government Portal (with links to English, Arabic versions)
  * (Hebrew) Prime Minister's Office, official site (with links to English, Arabic versions)
  * (Hebrew) President of the State of Israel, official site (with links to English, Arabic versions)
  * The Knesset, official site of Israel's parliament
  * (Hebrew) The Supreme Court, official site (with links to English, Arabic versions)
  * Ministry of Construction and Housing
  * Ministry of Foreign Affairs, official site
  * Ministry of Industry Trade & Labor Official Site
  * Ministry of Religion
  * Ministry of Tourism, official site
  * Chief of State and Cabinet Members
  * (Hebrew) Central Bureau of Statistics, official site (with links to English, Arabic versions)
  * Official political blog of Israel

General reference

  * Country Profile from BBC News
  * Israel from the EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica
  * Israel entry at The World Factbook
  * Israel resources from Columbia University Libraries
  * Israel at the Jewish Virtual Library
  * Israel (1988) from Library of Congress Country Studies
  * Israel at the Open Directory Project
  * Israel at UCB Libraries GovPubs
  * The State of Israel fact file at Ynetnews

Maps

  * Wikimedia Atlas of Israel
  * Israel-Palestine in Maps from hWeb

Media

  * Ynet News, based in Tel Aviv
  * The Jerusalem Post
  * HaAretz
  * Israel Broadcasting Authority, state broadcasting network (Hebrew) (with link to English version)
  * Israel National News
  * Kol Israel Voice of Israel

Other

  * Israel travel guide from Wikitravel
  * 31Â°37â²31â³N 35Â°08â²43â³Eï»¿ / ï»¿31.625321Â°N 35.145264Â°Eï»¿ / 31.625321; 35.145264 Israel

<IMG> Cyprus Lebanon Syria  
Golan Heights

v â¢ d â¢ e  
<IMG>  
Mediterranean Sea North West Bank â¢ Jordan  
West Outline of Israel East  
South  
Gaza Strip  
Egypt Gulf of Aqaba  
Red Sea Saudia Arabia  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Flag of IsraelIsrael topicsCoat of arms of Israel  
History

Jewish history Â· Zionism Â· Aliyah Â· Herzl Â· Balfour Declaration Â· British
Mandate Â· UN General Assembly Resolution 181 Â· Declaration of Independence
Â· Austerity  
Conflict

Israeli-Palestinian

History Â· Peace process Â· Israeli peace camp Â· First Intifada Â· Oslo
Accords Â· Second Intifada Â· Israeli West Bank barrier Â· Israel's unilateral
disengagement plan Â· Palestinian territories Â· Israel and the apartheid
analogy  
Arab-Israeli

History Â· 1948 Arab-Israeli War Â· 1949 Armistice Agreements Â· Jewish exodus
from Arab lands Â· Suez Crisis Â· Six-Day War Â· War of Attrition Â· Yom
Kippur War Â· 1982 Lebanon War Â· 2006 Lebanon War Â· Peace proposals Â·
Treaties with Egypt / Jordan Â· Israeli-occupied territories  
Government

Basic Laws of Israel (Law of Return Â· Jerusalem Law) Â· Knesset Â· Prime
Minister Â· President Â· Judicial system (Supreme Court)  
Security

Israel Defense Forces Â· Israeli Intelligence Community Â· Israeli National
Security Council Â· Israel Police Â· Israel Border Police Â· Israel Prison
Service  
Politics

Political parties (right-wing Â· left-wing Â· centre) Â· Elections  
Geography

Cities (Jerusalem Â· Tel Aviv Â· Haifa) Â· Districts Â· Regions (Mediterranean
Sea Â· Red Sea Â· Judea and Samaria Â· Sea of Galilee) Â· Mountains Â· Rivers
(Jordan River) Â· Nature reserves  
Economy

Israeli new sheqel Â· Companies Â· Tel Aviv Stock Exchange Â· Bank of Israel
Â· Banking Â· Standard of living (Personal / household income Â·
Homeownership) Â· Transport Â· Agriculture (research) Â· Tourism Â· Science
and technology Â· Wine Â· Diamond industry Â· Israel Military Industries Â·
Israel Aerospace Industries  
Culture and  
society

Arab citizens Â· Archaeology Â· Architecture Â· Cinema Â· Demographics
(Apartheid analogy) Â· Education (universities and colleges) Â· Jewish
holidays Â· Human rights Â· Kibbutz Â· Languages (Hebrew Â· Arabic) Â· Israeli
Law Â· Literature Â· Media Â· Music Â· Personalities Â· Postage stamps and
history Â· Religion Â· Social class (middle class Â· poverty) Â· Sports  
Foreign affairs

International law and the Arab-Israeli conflict Â· Israel, Palestinians, and
the United Nations Â· Israel-United States relations Â· Arab League and the
Arab-Israeli conflict  
WikiProject Â· Portal  
Geographic locale  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Countries of Asia  
Afghanistan Â· Armenia Â· Azerbaijan1 Â· Bahrain Â· Bangladesh Â· Bhutan Â·
Brunei Â· Burma Â· Cambodia Â· People's Republic of China Â· Republic of China
(Taiwan)2 Â· Cyprus Â· Egypt3 Â· Georgia1 Â· India Â· Indonesia4 Â· Iran Â·
Iraq Â· Israel Â· Japan Â· Jordan Â· Kazakhstan1 Â· North Korea Â· South Korea
Â· Kuwait Â· Kyrgyzstan Â· Laos Â· Lebanon Â· Malaysia Â· Maldives Â· Mongolia
Â· Nepal Â· Oman Â· Pakistan Â· Philippines Â· Qatar Â· Russia1 Â· Saudi
Arabia Â· Singapore Â· Sri Lanka Â· Syria Â· Tajikistan Â· Thailand Â· East
Timor (Timor-Leste)4 Â· Turkey1 Â· Turkmenistan Â· United Arab Emirates Â·
Uzbekistan Â· Vietnam Â· Yemen3

* * *
For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory.

* * *
1 Partly or significantly in Europe. 2 The Republic of China (Taiwan) is not
officially recognized by the United Nations; see Political status of Taiwan.  
3 Partly or significantly in Africa. 4 Partly or wholly reckoned in Oceania.  
  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Countries and territories of the Middle East and Greater Middle East  
Middle East

Bahrain Â· Egypt Â· Gaza Strip Â· Iraq Â· Iran Â· Israel Â· Jordan Â· Kuwait
Â· Lebanon Â· Oman Â· Qatar Â· Saudi Arabia Â· Syria Â· United Arab Emirates
Â· West Bank Â· Yemen  
Greater Middle East

Afghanistan Â· Algeria Â· Cyprus Â· Djibouti Â· Eritrea Â· Libya Â· Morocco Â·
Northern Cyprus1 Â· Pakistan Â· Somalia Â· Sudan Â· Tunisia Â· Turkey Â·
Western Sahara (SADR)  
1 Only recognized by Turkey; see Cyprus dispute.  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Countries and territories bordering the Mediterranean Sea  
Albania â¢ Algeria â¢ Bosnia-Herzegovina â¢ Croatia â¢ Cyprus â¢ Egypt
â¢ France â¢ Gibraltar â¢ Greece â¢ Israel â¢ Italy â¢ Lebanon â¢ Libya
â¢ Malta â¢ Monaco â¢ Montenegro â¢ Morocco â¢ Palestinian Authority â¢
Slovenia â¢ Spain â¢ Syria â¢ Tunisia â¢ Turkey â¢ Akrotiri / Dhekelia  
International organizations  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Members of the World Trade Organization (WTO)  
<IMG>

Albania Â· Angola Â· Antigua and Barbuda Â· Argentina Â· Armenia Â· Australia
Â· Bahrain Â· Bangladesh Â· Barbados Â· Belize Â· Benin Â· Bolivia Â· Botswana
Â· Brazil Â· Brunei Â· Burkina Faso Â· Burma Â· Burundi Â· Cambodia Â·
Cameroon Â· Canada Â· Cape Verde Â· Central African Republic Â· Chad Â· Chile
Â· PR China Â· Colombia Â· Democratic Republic of the Congo Â· Republic of the
Congo Â· Costa Rica Â· CÃ´te d'Ivoire Â· Croatia Â· Cuba Â· Djibouti Â·
Dominica Â· Dominican Republic Â· Ecuador Â· Egypt Â· El Salvador Â· European
UnionÂ¹ Â· Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) Â· Fiji Â· Gabon Â·
The Gambia Â· Georgia Â· Ghana Â· Grenada Â· Guatemala Â· Guinea Â· Guinea-
Bissau Â· Guyana Â· Haiti Â· Honduras Â· Hong KongÂ² Â· Iceland Â· India Â·
Indonesia Â· Israel Â· Jamaica Â· Japan Â· Jordan Â· Kenya Â· South Korea Â·
Kuwait Â· Kyrgyzstan Â· Lesotho Â· Liechtenstein Â· MacauÂ² Â· Madagascar Â·
Malawi Â· Malaysia Â· Maldives Â· Mali Â· Mauritania Â· Mauritius Â· Mexico Â·
Moldova Â· Mongolia Â· Morocco Â· Mozambique Â· Namibia Â· Nepal Â· New
Zealand Â· Nicaragua Â· Niger Â· Nigeria Â· Norway Â· Oman Â· Pakistan Â·
Panama Â· Papua New Guinea Â· Paraguay Â· Peru Â· Philippines Â· Qatar Â·
Rwanda Â· St. Kitts and Nevis Â· St. Lucia Â· St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Â· Saudi Arabia Â· Senegal Â· Sierra Leone Â· Singapore Â· Solomon Islands Â·
South Africa Â· Sri Lanka Â· Suriname Â· Swaziland Â· Switzerland Â· Separate
Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and MatsuÂ³ Â· Tanzania Â·
Thailand Â· Togo Â· Tonga Â· Trinidad and Tobago Â· Tunisia Â· Turkey Â·
Uganda Â· Ukraine Â· United Arab Emirates Â· United States Â· Uruguay Â·
Venezuela Â· Vietnam Â· Zambia Â· Zimbabwe

* * *
  1. All twenty-seven member states of the European Union are also members of the WTO in their own right: Austria â¢ Belgium â¢ Bulgaria â¢ Cyprus â¢ Czech Republic â¢ Denmark â¢ Estonia â¢ Finland â¢ France â¢ Germany â¢ Greece â¢ Hungary â¢ Ireland â¢ Italy â¢ Latvia â¢ Lithuania â¢ Luxembourg â¢ Malta â¢ Netherlands and Netherlands Antilles â¢ Poland â¢ Portugal â¢ Romania â¢ Slovakia â¢ Slovenia â¢ Spain â¢ Sweden â¢ United Kingdom.
  2. Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China.
  3. Designated name for the Republic of China (Commonly Known as Taiwan)

  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Israel"

Categories: Aliyah | Israel | Arabic-speaking countries | Hebrew words and
phrases | Levant | Liberal democracies | Near Eastern countries | States and
territories established in 1948 | Zionism

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since October 2008 | Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Featured
articles | Articles containing Arabic language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Alemannisch
  * á áá­á
  * Anglo-Saxon
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * ÜÜªÜ¡ÜÜ
  * Arpetan
  * Asturianu
  * AvaÃ±e'áº½
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bikol Central
  * Boarisch
  * à½à½¼à½à¼à½¡à½²à½
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Cebuano
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¬ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¦ÞÞ°
  * Dolnoserbski
  * à½à½¼à½à¼à½
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * Fiji Hindi
  * FÃ¸royskt
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Gaeilge
  * Gaelg
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * ð²ð¿ðð¹ððº
  * Hak-kÃ¢-fa
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ÙÙÙÙØ³Ù
  * Hawai`i
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Igbo
  * Ilokano
  * à¦à¦®à¦¾à¦° à¦ à¦¾à¦°/à¦¬à¦¿à¦·à§à¦£à§à¦ªà§à¦°à¦¿à¦¯à¦¼à¦¾ à¦®à¦£à¦¿à¦ªà§à¦°à§
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Interlingue
  * ÐÑÐ¾Ð½Ð°Ñ
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * Kapampangan
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * KaszÃ«bsczi
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * Kernewek
  * ÐÑÑÐ³ÑÐ·ÑÐ°
  * Kiswahili
  * ÐÐ¾Ð¼Ð¸
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Ladino
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LÃ­guru
  * Limburgs
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * ÐÐ¾ÐºÑÐµÐ½Ñ
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * NÄhuatl
  * Dorerin Naoero
  * Na Vosa Vakaviti
  * Nederlands
  * Nedersaksisch
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Nnapulitano
  * Norfuk / Pitkern
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Novial
  * Occitan
  * O'zbek
  * Ù¾ÚØªÙ
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * Tok Pisin
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * QÄ±rÄ±mtatarca
  * Ripoarisch
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡Ð°Ñ Ð° ÑÑÐ»Ð°
  * SÃ¡megiella
  * à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¥à¤à¥à¤¤
  * Sardu
  * Scots
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡Ð»Ð¾Ð²Ñ£ÌÐ½ÑÑÐºÑ / â°â°â°â°â°¡â°â° â°â°â°
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * ÅlÅ¯nski
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * Taqbaylit
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£Ð´Ð¼ÑÑÑ
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * Uyghurcheâ / Ø¦ÛÙØºÛØ±ÚÛ
  * VÃ¨neto
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * VolapÃ¼k
  * Walon
  * Winaray
  * Wolof
  * å´è¯­
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * YorÃ¹bÃ¡
  * ç²µèª
  * Zazaki
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 16 April 2009, at 15:11 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



