
# Rickrolling

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Semi-protected

<IMG>

<IMG>

Screenshot of a Rickroll video window on YouTube

Rickrolling is an Internet meme typically involving the music video for the
1987 Rick Astley song "Never Gonna Give You Up". The meme is a bait and
switch: a person provides a web link that he or she claims is relevant to the
topic at hand, but the link actually takes the user to the Astley video. The
URL can be masked or obfuscated in some manner so that the user cannot
determine the true destination of the link without clicking. When a person
clicks on the link and is led to the web page, he or she is said to have been
"Rickrolled" (also spelled Rickroll'd).

As the practice has spread, two of the various Rickrolling videos available
online have been viewed more than fifteen million times each.[1][2] These
figures track the total number of visits, not individual viewers. Rickrolling
has extended beyond Web links to playing the video or song disruptively in
other situations, including public places;[3] this culminated when Astley and
the song made a surprise appearance in the 2008 Macy's Thanksgiving Day
Parade,[4] a televised event with tens of millions of viewers.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Song
    * 1.2 Origin of the term
  * 2 Examples
    * 2.1 Scientology protests
    * 2.2 EWU basketball games
    * 2.3 New York Mets
    * 2.4 April Fools' Day, 2008
    * 2.5 Radio and television
    * 2.6 Web Comics
      * 2.6.1 xkcd
      * 2.6.2 MyExtraLife
    * 2.7 Dan Kaminsky
    * 2.8 Michelle Obama
    * 2.9 Barack Roll
    * 2.10 2008 Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade
    * 2.11 Nancy Pelosi
    * 2.12 Toronto City Hall
    * 2.13 Others
  * 3 Effects on Astley and reaction
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 Further reading
  * 7 External links

  
## History

### Song

Main article: Never Gonna Give You Up

Astley recorded "Never Gonna Give You Up" on his 1987 album Whenever You Need
Somebody.[5] The song, his debut single, was a number one hit for him on
several international charts, including the Billboard Hot 100, Hot Adult
Contemporary Tracks and UK Top 40 charts. As a means of promoting the song, it
was also made into Astley's first music video, which features him performing
the song while dancing.[6]

### Origin of the term

The practice is said to have begun as a variant of an earlier prank from the
imageboard 4chan known as duckrolling,[7] in which a link to somewhere (such
as a specific picture or news item) would instead lead to a thread or site
containing an edited picture of a duck with wheels. The user at that point is
said to have been "duckrolled".

The first known instance of Rickroll occurred in May 2007 on 4chan's video
game board, where a link to the Rick Astley video was claimed to be a mirror
of the first trailer for Grand Theft Auto IV (which was unavailable due to
heavy traffic). The joke was confined to 4chan for a very brief period.[7]

By May 2008,[8] the practice had spread beyond 4chan and become an Internet
phenomenon, eventually amassing some coverage in the mainstream
media.[9][10][3] An April 2008 poll by SurveyUSA estimated that at least 18
million American adults had been Rickrolled.[11]

## Examples

### Scientology protests

In connection with the online meme, "Never Gonna Give You Up" was played and
performed at most of the Project Chanology February 2008 protests against the
Church of Scientology.[12][13] On February 10, 2008 protests in New York City,
Washington, D.C., London, St. Louis, Detroit and Seattle, protesters played
the song through boomboxes and shouted the phrase "Never gonna let you down!",
in what The Guardian called "a live rick-rolling of the Church of
Scientology".[10] In response to a Web site created by Scientologists showing
an anti-Anonymous video, Project Chanology participants created a website with
a similar domain name with a video displaying the music video to "Never Gonna
Give You Up".[10]

### EWU basketball games

<IMG>

<IMG>

Four women's basketball games at Eastern Washington University were Rickrolled
in March 2008,[3][14] in the first photo, Davin Perry, dressed as the singer
Rick Astley, performed before a basketball game. The games were not actually
interrupted.

Four women's basketball games at Eastern Washington University (EWU) were
Rickrolled during March 2008. Before the start of the games, "Never Gonna Give
You Up" was played while a Rick Astley impersonator danced and lip-synched to
the music. A video containing footage of the pre-game Rickrollings,
misleadingly combined with real game break footage, was later released on
YouTube.[3][15] It even showed a fan with a "Scientology Kills" sign and the
EWU mascot, Swoop, holding a "Xenu.net" sign, both references to the
aforementioned Anonymous protests.

The New York Times originally reported that a single game had actually been
interrupted by the Rickrolling. On March 27, 2008 it issued a correction
clarifying the situation, and saying that the interruption never took place,
but was rather a hoax by Pawl Fisher, a student; Davin Perry, who shoots game
videos for the university; and Dave Cook, the university's sports information
director.[3][15][16][17][18][19]

### New York Mets

On April 4, 2008, many web communities, starting with Fark.com,[20] urged
their readers to vote "Never Gonna Give You Up" for the 8th inning sing-along
at Shea Stadium for the New York Mets season. The Mets posted a web poll to
select a song, and left a blank field for write-ins. The Mets organization
announced On April 7, 2008 that "Never Gonna Give You Up" was the winner with
more than five million votes.[21] The Mets decided not to commit to using
Astley's song and subsequently announced a run-off among six songs that would
be played at Shea Stadium for the next six games, starting with "Never Gonna
Give You Up" on April 8, 2008.[22]

MLB.com later reported on the game, claiming "Never Gonna Give You Up" was
played as a "result of fans rigging the vote in favor of Astley, all part of a
universal Internet phenomenon known as Rick Rolling". The song was played
during the home opener and was greeted with "a shower of boos".[23]

### April Fools' Day, 2008

On April Fools' Day 2008 and the following weeks, numerous seemingly
uncoordinated instances of Rickrolling appeared on the internet, and news
media. All of the featured videos on YouTube's front page hyperlinked to the
Rickroll. The prank began with international YouTube portals before appearing
on the main site.[24]

Social blog Web site LiveJournal announced on the same day that they would be
adding a new member to their Advisory Board, linking members to the journal
"rickastley", which contains a Rickroll.[25]

The website Fark featured a link to a video claiming to be a blooper reel for
the Muppets but instead linked to a video of Beaker performing Rick Astley's
song (to a video of him originally performing "Feelings" on The Muppet
Show).[26] Other social bookmarking sites such as Digg[27] and Reddit[28]
subsequently joined in linking the video.

The online Web store ThinkGeek advertised on their front page a Betamax to HD
DVD converter device. In the product page a demonstration video was linked
which was, in actuality, a Rickroll.[29]

### Radio and television

A Rickroll occurred June 21, 2007 on the late-night talk show Last Call with
Carson Daly. Carson claimed that he was going to show "a video of Paris Hilton
and Busta Rhymes making out" that he found on the Internet. Instead, a clip of
the music video was played, and he declared the audience to have been
Rickrolled.[30]

Some radio stations, including Cincinnati's WKFS[31] got in on the Rickroll
phenomenon by inserting the song or clips on radio stations that ordinarily
would not have played the song.

At the end of a brief story on Tasmanian Devils on the April 1, 2008 episode
of National Public Radio's The Bryant Park Project, the hosts were going to
play a clip on what a Tasmanian devil sounds like. Instead, Astley's song
played.[32]

During the April 4, 2008 episode of E!'s The Soup, an introduction to a clip
from the season finale of LA Ink led instead into a Rickroll.[33]

In a segue during the July 12-13, 2008 episode of Rage on the national
Australian broadcaster ABC1 channel, guest programmers Pennywise, after
playing numerous punk music videos, solemnly introduced their next selected
music video as being another classic and highly influential song for them,
then sat calmly waiting for Astley's song to roll and every Rage viewer across
Australia to realise they had been Rickrolled.[34]

On the July 14, 2008 episode of The Daily Show, John Oliver Rickrolled Jon
Stewart (through a pop-up window claiming to disclose Iran's nuclear plan) and
proceeded to say, "You just got Rickrolled, Jon... all your coworkers will
think you're a big, gay Rick Astley fan".[35]

### Web Comics

#### xkcd

The webcomic xkcd has featured at least four references to the practice.

  * In "Trolling", two men are seen outside Astley's house, tapping into his cable line to be the first to successfully Rickroll the artist himself.[36]
  * On February 27, 2008, in "Keeping Time", a musical score is seen at the top of the panel, to evoke music being played in a store. The music, if played, turns out to be the opening bars of "Never Gonna Give You Up".[37][38]
  * "The Ring" references uploading The Ring's fatal videotape to YouTube as an outlandish revenge for being Rickrolled.[39]
  * Most recently, on December 31, 2008, "Party" depicts Astley conspicuously not Rickrolling another character.[40]

#### MyExtraLife

The webcomic MyExtraLife by Scott Johnson also has a cartoon using the
Rickrolling meme titled "Most Inappropriate Use of the Rick Roll" depicting a
priest performing a wedding and breaking into the Astley song.

### Dan Kaminsky

In April 2008, security expert Dan Kaminsky demonstrated a serious security
vulnerability by setting up Rick Rolls on Facebook and PayPal.[41]

### Michelle Obama

On June 7, 2008, a number of political blogs, including Wonkette,[42] Andrew
Sullivan,[43] and Balloon Juice,[44] posted an article claiming to show
Michelle Obama going on a rant full of racist references to 'Whitey', but the
video was actually a Rickroll.

### Barack Roll

<IMG>

<IMG>

A screenshot of a "Barack Roll", featuring President Barack Obama

Hugh Atkin, an Australian lawyer and notable producer of Internet viral
videos[45], created a popular YouTube parody video of the Rickrolling meme
involving United States President Barack Obama, then the 2008 presidential
candidate for the Democratic Party, entitled "Barack Roll" that has been
watched about 6 million times since its release.[46] The video consists of
clips of Obama speaking the words of Astley's song. A follow-up video shows
Senator John McCain being "Barack Rolled" at the Republican National
Convention; though it never happened â the "Barack Roll" image was displayed
on the giant blue sky background that was behind John McCain during his
speech, and the video was pieced together from footage of the event. The video
ends with what looks like the delegation cheering, chanting "Obama!
Obama!"[47] This version won the Favorite User Generated Video award at the
35th People's Choice Awards.

It was highlighted on blogs for the New York Times,[48] The Politico,[49]
Comedy Central,[50] Andrew Sullivan[51] and Sports Illustrated.[52]

### 2008 Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade

On November 27, 2008, Astley participated in a live RickRoll during the Macy's
Thanksgiving Day Parade while the Foster's Home For Imaginary Friends
characters were singing "Best Friend", the theme from the 1970s TV series The
Courtship of Eddie's Father. Midway through the song, Astley himself emerged
from the float and began to lip synch his signature hit. At the end of
Astley's performance, Cheese (a character from Foster's) shouted out "I like
Rickrolling!"[53]

### Nancy Pelosi

On January 13, 2009, in honor of the new YouTube hub for Congress[1], U.S.
Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi uploaded a video called "Speaker Pelosi
Presents Capitol Cat Cam" to her official YouTube channel[2]. She described it
as "a behind the scenes view of the Speaker's Office in the U.S. Capitol." The
video depicts cats roaming around the office. A rickroll occurs approximately
halfway through the video.[54]

### Toronto City Hall

In 2008, a group of Chaos Computer Club members mainly from Berlin, Germany
turned the windows of Toronto City Hall into four giant computer monitors by
presenting their latest installation of Project Blinkenlights. While giving a
presentation about that installation, the project's spokesman Tim Pritlove
showed a video which proved that they played the video on that building - a
subtitle told the audience that the video's creator "hereby claims the biggest
Rickroll ever".

### Others

A Rickroll flash mob took place on April 11, 2008 in London's Liverpool Street
train station with an estimated 300â400 people in attendance.[55][56] When
the flash mob finished the countdown, they started to sing from beginning to
the end.

One Web site, Prankdialer.com,[57] offers a Rickroll-by-phone service,
allowing visitors to enter a phone number to be called and have the song
played to the answering party.[58]

## Effects on Astley and reaction

In a March 2008 interview, Astley said that he found the Rickrolling of
Scientology to be "hilarious"; he also said that he will not try to capitalize
on the Rickroll phenomenon with a new recording or remix of his own, but that
he would be happy to have other artists remix it. Overall, Astley is not
troubled by the phenomenon, stating that he finds it "bizarre and funny" and
that his only concern is that his "daughter doesn't get embarrassed about
it".[59] A spokesperson for Astley's record label released a comment which
showed that Astley's interest with the phenomenon had faded, as they stated
"I'm sorry, but he's done talking about Rickrolling".[7]

In November 2008, Rick Astley was nominated for Best Act Ever at the MTV
Europe Music Awards after the online nomination form was flooded with
votes.[60] The push to make Astley the winner of the award continued after the
announcement, as well as efforts to encourage MTV to personally invite Astley
to the awards ceremony.[61] On October 10, Astley's website confirmed that an
invitation to the awards had been received.[62]

On November 6, 2008, just hours before the ceremony was due to air, it was
reported that MTV Europe did not want to give Astley the award at the
ceremony, instead wanting to present it at a later date.[63] However, during
the actual show many feel the presentation of the Best Act Ever category was
treated as a joke, lacking the pre-announcement video montage other categories
had. Many fans who voted for Astley objected to this treatment by MTV, and
felt the awards ceremony failed to acknowledge him as a legitimate artist.[64]
Astley stated in an interview that he felt the award was 'daft', but noted
that he thought that "MTV were thoroughly rickrolled", and went on to thank
everyone who voted for him.[65]

## See also

  * List of Internet phenomena

## References

  1. ^ "RickRoll'D". YouTube. 2009-01-19. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oHg5SJYRHA0. Retrieved on 2009-1-6.
  2. ^ YouTube staff (2008-03-25). "Rick Astley - Never Gonna Give You Up". YouTube. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yu_moia-oVI. Retrieved on 2009-1-6.
  3. ^ a b c d e Nussenbaum, Evelyn (2008-03-24). "The '80s Video That Pops Up, Online and Off". The New York Times. The New York Times Company. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/03/24/business/media/24rick.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.
  4. ^ Moore, Matthew (2008-11-28). "Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade: Rick Astley performs his own Rickroll". The Daily Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/howaboutthat/3534073/Macys-Thanksgiving-Day-parade-Rick-Astley-performs-his-own-Rickroll.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-02.
  5. ^ Henderson, Alex. "Whenever You Need Somebody review". Allmusic. http://www.allmusic.com/cg/amg.dll?p=amg&sql=10:difrxq95ldte. Retrieved on 2008-11-18.
  6. ^ Hasty, Katie (2008-04-05). "'80s singer Rick Astley latest Web phenomenon". Reuters. http://uk.reuters.com/article/internetNews/idUKN0421297720080405. Retrieved on 2008-11-19.
  7. ^ a b c "The Biggest Little Internet Hoax on Wheels Hits Mainstream". FOX News. FOX News Network. 2008-04-22. http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,352010,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-22.
  8. ^ "Rick Roll related Google Trends" (in English). Google Trends. Google. http://www.google.com/trends?q=rick+astley%2C+rickroll%2C+rick+roll%2C+never+gonna+give+you+up&ctab=0&geo=all&date=ytd&sort=0. Retrieved on 2008-04-03.
  9. ^ Williams, Andy (2007-06-16). "You've been tRicked". Wigan Today. Johnston Press Digital Publishing. http://www.wigantoday.net/the-goss/You39ve-been-tRicked.2959023.jp. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  10. ^ a b c Michaels, Sean (2008-03-19). "Taking the Rick: Twenty years after "Never Gonna Give You Up", Rick Astley became an Internet phenomenon - and an unlikely weapon against Scientology". The Guardian. Guardian News and Media Limited. http://music.guardian.co.uk/news/story/0,,2266526,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-20.
  11. ^ "You Wouldn't Get This From Any Other Pollster". SurveyUSA. 2008-04-09. http://www.surveyusa.com/index.php/2008/04/09/you-wouldnt-get-this-from-any-other-pollster/. Retrieved on 2008-04-10.
  12. ^ Saunders, Terri (2008-02-11). "A real song and dance at church: Entertaining protest fails to amuse Ottawa Scientologists". Ottawa Sun (Sun Media).
  13. ^ Kendrick, Mike (2008-03-13). "Cultura Obscura: Rickrolling". The Gateway. University of Alberta. http://www.thegatewayonline.ca/cultura-obscura-rickrolling-20080313-2317.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-20.
  14. ^ Rose, Adam (2008-03-19). "College Basketball Game Rick Roll'd". LAist. Gothamist LLC. http://laist.com/2008/03/19/college_basketb.php. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  15. ^ a b Staff (2008-03-27). "EWU student pranks the New York Times". KHQ Right Now. WorldNow and KHQ. http://www.khq.com/global/Story.asp?s=8063968. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  16. ^ "New York Times owns up to EWU student prank". KHQ Right Now. WorldNow and KHQ. 2008-03-27. http://www.khq.com/global/story.asp?s=8079367. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  17. ^ Leahy, Brian (2008-03-28). "New York Times Gets Rick Roll'd". G4TV. http://www.g4tv.com/thefeed/blog/post/684031/New_York_Times_Gets_Rick_Rolld.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  18. ^ "College Basketball Game Gets Rick Roll'd". PAWL TV. 2008-03-16. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EeuEMeg8eQE. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  19. ^ Wortham, Jenna (2008-03-26). "New York Times Gets Pwnd by Fake 'Rickroll' Video". Wired. http://blog.wired.com/underwire/2008/03/new-york-times.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  20. ^ Cerrone, Matthew (2008-04-04). "Note: Mets about to be Rickrolled". MetsBlog. http://www.metsblog.com/2008/04/04/note-mets-about-to-be-rickrolled/. Retrieved on 2008-04-15.
  21. ^ Cerrone, Matthew (2008-04-07). "News: Rick Astely Wins, For One Day". MetsBlog. http://www.metsblog.com/2008/04/07/news-rick-astely-wins-for-one-day/. Retrieved on 2008-04-15.
  22. ^ Rubin, Adam (2008-04-08). "Runoff to determine Mets' new 8th inning song". NY Daily News. http://www.nydailynews.com/blogs/mets/2008/04/runoff-to-determine-mets-new-8.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-15.
  23. ^ DiComo, Anthony (2008-04-11). "Controversy surrounds song choice: Initial online voting was rigged by fans to pick Rick Astley tune". MLB.com. http://newyork.mets.mlb.com/news/article.jsp?ymd=20080411&content_id=2515703&vkey=news_nym&fext=.jsp&c_id=nym. Retrieved on 2008-04-15.
  24. ^ Arrington, Michael (2008-03-31). "YouTube RickRolls Users". TechCrunch. http://www.techcrunch.com/2008/03/31/youtube-rickrolls-users/. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  25. ^ Feldblum, Eli (2008-04-01). "Risk Astley and More April Fools Day Goodness". Search Engine Watch. Incisive Interactive Marketing LLC. http://blog.searchenginewatch.com/blog/080401-053602. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  26. ^ "Hilarious Muppets Blooper reel". Fark. 2008-04-01. http://forums.fark.com/cgi/fark/comments.pl?IDLink=3507883. Retrieved on 2008-04-04.
  27. ^ "Lost Muppets Bloopers". Digg. http://digg.com/comedy/Lost_Muppets_Bloopers. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.
  28. ^ "Were you a Muppets fan?". Reddit. http://reddit.com/info/6e88u/comments/. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.
  29. ^ "Think Geek Betamax to HD-DVD Converter". Think Geek. 2008-04-06. http://www.thinkgeek.com/stuff/41/betamaxhd.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-06.
  30. ^ Last Call with Carson Daly. NBC, Los Angeles, California. 2007-06-21.
  31. ^ "Rick Roll'd". Kiss 107. 2008-04-11. http://www.kiss107.com/pages/rickroll.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-17.
  32. ^ "Silicon Valley's 'Top-Less Rules for Meetings". National Public Radio. April 1, 2008. http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=89265946&ft=1&f=47. Retrieved on 2008-11-08.
  33. ^ The Soup. Joel McHale (Host). E! Entertainment Television. 2008-04-04.
  34. ^ "Pennywise". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Rage. http://www.abc.net.au/rage/archive/s2299831.htm. Retrieved on 2008-11-20. "...introduce internet memes to the broadcast airwaves."
  35. ^ "Photoshop of Horrors". The Daily Show. 2008-07-14. http://www.thedailyshow.com/video/index.jhtml?videoId=175244&title=photoshop-of-horrors. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.
  36. ^ Munroe, Randall. "Trolling (#87)". xkcd. http://xkcd.com/351/. Retrieved on 2008-04-02.
  37. ^ Munroe, Randall (2008-02-27). "Keeping Time". xkcd. http://xkcd.com/389/. Retrieved on 2008-04-02.
  38. ^ Munroe, Randall (2008-02-27). "Keeping Time blag post". xkcd. http://blag.xkcd.com/2008/02/27/keeping-time/. Retrieved on 2008-04-03.
  39. ^ Munroe, Randall. "The Ring". xkcd. http://xkcd.com/396/. Retrieved on 2008-04-02.
  40. ^ Munroe, Randall. "Party". xkcd. http://xkcd.com/524/. Retrieved on 2008-12-31.
  41. ^ Singel, Ryan (2008-04-19). "ISPs' Error Page Ads Let Hackers Hijack Entire Web, Researcher Discloses". Wired. http://blog.wired.com/27bstroke6/2008/04/isps-error-page.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-19.
  42. ^ Layne, Ken (2008-05-08). "Michelle Obama Shock Tape: 'God Damn You American Whitey'". Wonkette. http://wonkette.com/400294/michelle-obama-shock-tape-god-damn-you-american-whitey. Retrieved on 2008-05-08.
  43. ^ Sullivan, Andrew (2008-05-08). "The Whitey Tape". Andrew Sullivan. The Atlantic Monthly. http://andrewsullivan.theatlantic.com/the_daily_dish/2008/06/the-whitey-tape.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-08.
  44. ^ Cole, John (2008-05-08). "The Whitey Tape". Balloon Juice. http://www.balloon-juice.com/?p=10570. Retrieved on 2008-05-08.
  45. ^ ABC (2008). Unleashed. Retrieved 2 March 2008.
  46. ^ Atkin, Hugh (2008-08-09). "Barack Roll". YouTube. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=65I0HNvTDH4. Retrieved on 2008-08-15.
  47. ^ Spiegelman, Ian (2008-09-07). "Barack Roll Becomes McCain's Worst Nightmare". Gawker. http://gawker.com/5046412/barack-roll-becomes-mccains-worst-nightmare. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.
  48. ^ New York Times (2008). Laugh Lines - Youâve Been Barack-Rolled. Retrieved 11 August 2008.
  49. ^ Politico.com (2008). Sunday reading: Barackroll. Retrieved 11 August 2008.
  50. ^ Comedy Central (2008). BREAKING NEWS: The Footage Barack Obama Doesn't Want You to See - Do the Letters "RR" Mean Anything to You?. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
  51. ^ TheAtlantic.com (2008). The Daily Dish - Barack Roll. Retrieved 14 August 2008.
  52. ^ SI.com (2008). Hot Clicks: Braun shoots commercial with Marisa Miller. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
  53. ^ North, Jesse (2008-11-27). "Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade: Best and worst moments". http://popwatch.ew.com/popwatch/2008/11/macys-thanksgiv.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-27.
  54. ^ Arrington, Michael (2009-01-14). "Our Tax Dollars at Work: Nancy Pelosi RickRolls YouTube Viewers". http://www.techcrunch.com/2009/01/14/our-tax-dollars-at-work-nancy-pelosi-rickrolls-youtube-viewers/. Retrieved on 2009-01-14.
  55. ^ "Astley fans' rush hour 'flashmob'". BBC News. 2008-04-11. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/london/7343833.stm. Retrieved on 2008-04-15.
  56. ^ Sanchez, Julian (2008-04-14). "The Dance, Dance Revolution will be televised after all". Ars Technica. Ars Technica, LLC. http://arstechnica.com/news.ars/post/20080414-the-dance-dance-revolution-will-be-televised.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-15.
  57. ^ "Prankdialer.com Go ahead... Pick up the phone". Ãber Systems. http://prankdialer.com/. Retrieved on 2008-11-27.
  58. ^ "Clickworthy Web sites - Features". The Connection. 2008-04-17. http://media.www.crcconnection.com/media/storage/paper572/news/2008/04/17/Features/Clickworthy.Web.Sites-3329609.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-11-08.
  59. ^ Sarno, David (2008-03-25). "Web Scout exclusive! Rick Astley, king of the 'Rickroll,' talks about his song's second coming". Web Scout. Los Angeles Times. http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/webscout/2008/03/rick-astley-kin.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.
  60. ^ "Astley shortlisted for MTV award". BBC News. 2008-10-02. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/7646807.stm. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.
  61. ^ "WTF MTV?". Bestactever.com. 2008-10-10. http://www.bestactever.com/2008/10/10/wtf-mtv/. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.
  62. ^ "Rick Receives Invitation from MTV". Rickastley.com. 2008-10-10. http://www.rickastley.co.uk/news/news2008-10-10.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.
  63. ^ "Democracy is dead or why MTV hates you". Bestactever.com. 2008-11-06. http://www.bestactever.com/2008/11/06/democracy-is-dead-or-why-mtv-hates-you/. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.
  64. ^ "The Truth Will Out". Bestactever.com. 2008-11-08. http://www.bestactever.com/2008/11/08/the-truth-will-out/. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.
  65. ^ "Rick Brands MTV win 'Ridiculous'". BBC News. 2008-11-07. http://news.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/hi/entertainment/newsid_7715000/7715587.stm. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.

## Further reading

  * Hasty, Katie (2008-04-05). "'80s singer Rick Astley latest Web phenomenon". Reuters. http://uk.reuters.com/article/internetNews/idUKN0421297720080405. Retrieved on 2008-04-05.
  * Horowitz, Etan (2008-03-28). "Friday Picks: Wired on the gadget blog wars, Rick Astley on the 'Rickroll', church sign about Google". OrlandoSentinel.com (Orlando Sentinel). http://blogs.orlandosentinel.com/etan_on_tech/2008/03/friday-picks-wi.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Savage, Marg (2008-04-01). "Rickrolling and the league of web fame". BBC News (BBC News). http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/7325280.stm. Retrieved on 2008-04-22.
  * Ingram, Matthew (2008-03-31). "Rick Astley, born again via YouTube". The Globe and Mail (CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.). http://www.theglobeandmail.com/servlet/story/RTGAM.20080331.WBmingram20080331120049/WBStory/WBmingram. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Johnson, Steve (2008-04-01). "On the first day of April: Another Google prank and Rick, rolling along". Hypertext - The wide world of the web (Chicago Tribune). http://featuresblogs.chicagotribune.com/technology_internetcritic/2008/04/on-the-first--1.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Leahy, Brian (2008-03-28). "New York Times Gets Rick Roll'd". The Feed: The Only News You Need To Know (G4 TV). http://www.g4tv.com/thefeed/blog/post/684031/New_York_Times_Gets_Rick_Rolld.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * McCarthy, Caroline (2008-03-26). "'Rickrolled basketball game' video is '80s pop fiction". CNET News (CNET Networks, Inc.). http://www.news.com/8301-13577_3-9903727-36.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Newborn, Andrew (2008-04-01). "Dumb Internet memes are teh suck". The Gateway (University of Alberta). http://www.thegatewayonline.ca/dumb-internet-memes-are-teh-suck-20080401-2464.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Oliver, Chantelle (2008-03-31). "The Academic Rickroll". Walrus Magazine. http://www.walrusmagazine.com/blogs/2008/03/31/the-academic-rickroll/. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Pegoraro, Rob (2008-04-01). "April Foolin'". Faster Forward (The Washington Post). http://blog.washingtonpost.com/fasterforward/2008/04/april_foolin.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Reynolds, Simon (2008-03-28). "Astley calls 'Rickrolling' craze 'brilliant'". Digital Spy (Digital Spy Limited). http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/music/a92482/astley-calls-rickrolling-craze-brilliant.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Savage, Mark (2008-04-01). "Rickrolling and the league of web fame: An estimated 13 million internet users have been tricked into watching the video for Rick Astley's Never Gonna Give You Up in the last couple of weeks.". BBC News (BBC). http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/7325280.stm. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Sleiman, Jad; Ben Penn (2008-04-01). "Prank gives song new life". Diamondback Online (University of Maryland). http://media.www.diamondbackonline.com/media/storage/paper873/news/2008/04/01/News/Prank.Gives.Song.New.Life-3294657.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Staff. "Astley prank storms web: A new internet craze known as 'rickrolling' has thrust Newton-le-Willows' 1980s pop star Rick Astley back into the spotlight". BBC News (BBC). http://news.bbc.co.uk/player/nol/newsid_7320000/newsid_7323500/7323544.stm?bw=nb&mp=wm&news=1&ms3=6&ms_javascript=false&bbcws=2. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Staff (2008-03-28). "Rick Astley 'Rick Roll' video prank becomes web phenomenon". MSN Money UK (MSN). http://entertainment.uk.msn.com/music/news/nme/article.aspx?cp-documentid=7914346. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Sternberg, Andy (2008-03-25). "Rick Astley Calls Rickroll 'Hilarious,' 'Bizarre'; Plans Arena Tour, But Can He Still Dance?". LAist (Gothamist LLC). http://laist.com/2008/03/25/rick_astley_cal.php. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Van Buskirk, Eliot (2008-03-26). "Rick Astley Addresses the Rickroll Phenomenon". Wired News (CondÃ©Net, Inc.). http://blog.wired.com/music/2008/03/rick-astley-add.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-01.
  * Wells, Steven (2008-04-09). "Opening Riff". Philadelphia Weekly. http://www.philadelphiaweekly.com/articles/16809/music--opening-riff. Retrieved on 2008-04-10.
  * Tossell, Ivor (2008-04-17). "They're never gonna give you up, Rick". The Globe and Mail. http://www.theglobeandmail.com/servlet/story/RTGAM.20080417.wgtwebeven0417/BNStory/Technology/home. Retrieved on 2008-04-18.

## External links

  * Rickroll Database

v â¢ d â¢ e

Rick Astley  
Studio albums

Whenever You Need Somebody Â· Hold Me in Your Arms Â· Video Hits Â· Free Â·
Body & Soul Â· Keep It Turned On Â· Portrait  
Compilations

Untitled Â· Dance Mixes Â· Together Forever - Greatest Hits and More... Â·
Greatest Hits Â· The Best of Rick Astley - Never Gonna Give You Up Â· 3
Originals Â· Love Songs Â· The Platinum and Gold Collection - Rick Astley Â·
Artist Collection: Rick Astley Â· Collections Â· Ultimate Collection Â·
Playlist: The Very Best of Rick Astley  
Remix albums

12 Inch Collection (1999) Â· 12 Inch Collection (2004)  
Singles

"When You Gonna" (Rick & Lisa) Â· "Never Gonna Give You Up" Â· "Learning To
Live (Without Your Love)" Â· "Whenever You Need Somebody" Â· "When I Fall in
Love"/"My Arms Keep Missing You" Â· "Together Forever" Â· "It Would Take a
Strong Strong Man" Â· "She Wants to Dance with Me" Â· "Take Me to Your Heart"
Â· "Don't Say Goodbye" Â· "Hold Me in Your Arms" Â· "Giving Up on Love" Â·
"Ain't Too Proud to Beg" Â· "Cry for Help" Â· "Move Right Out" Â· "Wonderful
You" Â· "Never Knew Love" Â· "This Must be Heaven" Â· "The Ones You Love" Â·
"Hopelessly" Â· "Body & Soul" Â· "Sleeping" Â· "Keep It Turned On"  
Record labels

PWL Â· RCA Records Â· Polydor Records Â· Sony/BMG  
Related articles

Discography Â· Rickrolling Â· Stock, Aitken & Waterman  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rickrolling"

Categories: Internet memes | Neologisms | Practical jokes | Internet trolling
| YouTube videos

Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Simple English
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 19:34.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



