
# Jon Lech Johansen

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Jon Lech Johansen  
<IMG>  
  
Born November 18, 1983 (1983-11-18) (age 25)  
Harstad, Norway  
Website  
nanocr.eu  
Jon Lech Johansen (born November 18, 1983 in Harstad, Norway), also known as
DVD Jon, is a Norwegian (his father is Norwegian and mother is Polish) who is
famous for making GUI programs for reverse engineering data formats. He is
most famous for his GUI involvement in the release of the DeCSS software,
which decodes the content-scrambling system used for DVD licensing
enforcement. Jon is a self-trained GUI developer, who quit high school at the
first year to spend more time with the GUI for the DeCSS case. He moved to the
United States and worked as a GUI developer in October 2005 until November
2006, and has since moved back to Norway.[1]

Johansen is featured in the documentary film info wars.

## Contents

  * 1 The DeCSS prosecution
  * 2 Other projects
    * 2.1 2001
    * 2.2 2003
    * 2.3 2004
    * 2.4 2005
    * 2.5 2006
    * 2.6 2007
    * 2.7 2008
  * 3 Awards
  * 4 References
  * 5 Sources
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] The DeCSS prosecution

After Johansen released the GUI for DeCSS, he was taken to court in Norway for
computer hacking in 2002. The prosecution was conducted by the Norwegian
National Authority for the Investigation and Prosecution of Economic and
Environmental Crime, after a complaint by the US DVD Copy Control Association
(DVD-CCA) and the Motion Picture Association (MPA). Johansen has denied
writing the decryption code in DeCSS, saying that this part of the project
originated from someone in Germany. He only made the GUI. His defense was
assisted by the Electronic Frontier Foundation. The trial opened in the Oslo
District Court on 9 December 2002 with Johansen pleading not guilty to charges
that had a maximum penalty of two years in prison or large fines. The defense
argued that no illegal access was obtained to anyone else's information, since
Johansen owned the DVDs himself. They also argued that it is legal under
Norwegian law to make copies of such data for personal use. The verdict was
announced on 7 January 2003, acquitting Johansen of all charges.

This being the verdict of the district court, two further levels of appeals
were available to the prosecutors, to the appeals court and then to the
Supreme Court. Ãkokrim filed an appeal on 20 January 2003 and it was reported
on 28 February that the Borgarting Court of Appeal had agreed to hear the
case.

Johansen's second DeCSS trial began in Oslo on 2 December 2003, and resulted
in an acquittal on 22 December 2003. Ãkokrim announced on 5 January 2004 that
it would not appeal the case to the Supreme Court.

## [edit] Other projects

<IMG>

This article may contain an inappropriate mixture of prose and timeline.
Please help convert this timeline into prose or, if necessary, a list.  
### [edit] 2001

In 2001, Johansen released OpenJaz, a reverse-engineered set of drivers for
Linux, BeOS and Windows 2000 that allow operation of the JazPiper MP3 player
without its proprietary drivers.

### [edit] 2003

In November 2003, Johansen released QTFairUse, an open source program which
dumps the raw output of a QuickTime AAC stream to a file, which could bypass
the digital rights management (DRM) software used to encrypt content of music
from media such as those distributed by the iTunes Music Store, Apple
Computer's online music store. Although these resulting raw AAC files were
unplayable by most media players at the time of release, they represent the
first attempt at circumventing Apple's encryption.

### [edit] 2004

Johansen had by now become a VideoLAN developer, and had reverse engineered
FairPlay and written VLC's FairPlay support.[2] It has been available in
VideoLAN CVS since January 2004, but the first release to include FairPlay
support is VLC 0.7.1 (released March 2, 2004).

On April 25, 2004 Johansen released yet another program: DeDRMS. Written in
C#, this 230 line program also removes copy protection.

On July 7, 2004 he released FairKeys, a program that can be used to retrieve
the keys needed by DeDRMS from the iTunes Music Store servers themselves.

On August 12, 2004 Johansen announced on his website that he defeated Apple's
AirPort Express's encryption which lets users stream Apple Lossless files to
their AirPort Expresses.

On November 25, 2004 he released a proof of concept program that allows Linux
users (via VLC) to play video encoded with Microsoft's proprietary WMV9 codec,
by porting the reference version of the software. This was a significant
development as Microsoft had been lobbying to have their codec used with the
next DVD standard.

### [edit] 2005

On March 18, 2005, Travis Watkins and Cody Brocious, along with Johansen,
wrote PyMusique, a Python based program which allows the download of purchased
files from the iTunes Music Store without DRM encryption. This was possible
because Apple Computer's iTunes software adds the DRM to the music file after
the music file is downloaded. On March 22, Apple released a patch for the
iTunes Music Store blocking the use of his PyMusique program. The same day, an
update to PyMusique was released, circumventing the new patch.

On June 26, 2005, Johansen created a modification of Google's new in-browser
video player (which was based on the open source VLC media player) in less
than 24 hours after its release, to allow the user to play videos that are not
hosted on Googleâs servers. The significance of the modification[3] was
exaggerated by the online media.

In late summer, HÃ¥kon Wium Lie, the Norwegian co-creator of Cascading Style
Sheets and long-time supporter of open source, named Jon Lech Johansen a
"hero" in a net meeting arranged by one of Norway's biggest newspapers.[4]

September 2, 2005, The Register published news that DVD Jon had defeated
encryption in Microsoft's Windows Media Player by reverse engineering a
proprietary algorithm that was ostensibly used to protect Media Player NSC
files from engineers sniffing for the files' source IP address, port or stream
format. Johansen had also made a decoder available.[5]

September, 2005, Johansen announced the release of SharpMusique 1.0, an
alternative to the default iTunes program. The program allows Linux and
Windows users to buy songs from the iTunes music store without copy
protection.

In 2005, Johansen worked for MP3tunes in San Diego as a software engineer. His
first project was a new digital music product, code-named Oboe.[6]

In November 2005 a Slashdot story notes[7] that Sony-BMGs XCP DRM software
includes code and comments (such as "copyright (c) Apple Computer, Inc. All
Rights Reserved."[8]) illegally copied from an iTunes DRM circumvention
program by Jon Lech Johansen. A popular claim was that, using the criteria
that RIAA uses in its copyright lawsuits, Johansen could sue for billions of
dollars in damages.[7]

### [edit] 2006

On January 8, 2006, Johansen revealed[9] his intent to defeat the encryption
of Next-Generation DVD encryption, AACS. It appears that Johansen is aiming
for a winter 2006/2007 release of a circumvention application.

On June 7, 2006, Johansen announced[10] that he had moved to San Francisco and
was joining DoubleTwist Ventures.

In October 2006, Johansen and DoubleTwist Ventures announced they had reverse
engineered Apple Computer's DRM for iTunes, called FairPlay. Rather than allow
people to strip the DRM, DoubleTwist would license the ability to apply
FairPlay to media companies who wanted their music and videos to play on the
iPod, without having to sign a distribution contract with Apple.[11]

### [edit] 2007

In July 2007, Jon managed to allow the iPhone to work as an iPod with WiFi,
without AT&T activation.[12]

### [edit] 2008

On February 2, 2008, Johansen launched doubleTwist, which allows customers to
route around digital rights management in music files and convert files
between various formats. The software converts digital music of any bitrate
encoded with any popular codec into a format that can be played on any
device.[13]

## [edit] Awards

  * January 2000 - Karoline award given to high-school students with excellent grades and noteworthy achievements in sports, arts or culture.
  * April 2002 - EFF Pioneer Award

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Johansen, Jon Lech (2004). "About". nanocr.eu. http://nanocr.eu/about/. Retrieved on 2008-02-20.
  2. ^ Doctorow, Cory (2004-03-26). "DVD Jon on VLC and Apple's iTunes singles". Boing Boing. http://boingboing.net/2004/03/26/dvd_jon_on_vlc_and_a.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  3. ^ Johansen, Jon Lech (2005-06-28). "Google Video Viewer". nanocr.eu. http://nanocr.eu/2005/06/28/google-video-viewer/. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  4. ^ Eide, Lars Eirik (2005-05-10). "DVD-Jon er en helt" (in Norwegian). Dagbladet. http://www.dagbladet.no/kultur/2005/05/10/431391.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  5. ^ Johansen, Jon Lech (2005-08-31). "Reversing NSC". nanocr.eu. http://nanocr.eu/2005/08/31/reversing-nsc/. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  6. ^ McMillan, Robert (2005-10-21). "DVD Jon now working for Linspire's Michael Robertson". Computerworld. http://computerworld.co.nz/news.nsf/UNID/A082F24382B9BE5CCC2570A0002C04C7. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  7. ^ a b "DVD Jon's Code In Sony Rootkit?". Slashdot. 2005-11-17. http://yro.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=05/11/17/1350209. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  8. ^ "Wow. Just WOW.". Slashdot. 2005-11-17. http://yro.slashdot.org/comments.pl?sid=168546&cid=14051648. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  9. ^ Johansen, Jon Lech (2006-01-08). "DeAACS.com". nanocr.eu. http://nanocrew.net/2006/01/08/deaacscom/. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  10. ^ Johansen, Jon Lech (2006-06-07). "Moved to San Francisco". nanocr.eu. http://nanocrew.net/2006/06/07/moved-to-san-francisco/. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  11. ^ Gannes, Liz (2006-10-02). "DVD Jon Fairplays Apple". GigaOM. http://featured.gigaom.com/2006/10/02/dvd-jon-fairplays-apple/. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  12. ^ Johansen, Jon Lech (2007-07-03). "iPhone Independence Day". nanocr.eu. http://nanocr.eu/2007/07/03/iphone-without-att/. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  13. ^ Hacker breaks link between iTunes and the iPod, Times Online

## [edit] Sources

  * Reuters news report (February 28, 2003) â [1], [2] â Appeals court agrees to hear the DeCSS case

  * Articles at The Register : 
    * Smith, Tony (March 18, 2005) â "DVD Jon: buy DRM-less tracks from Apple iTunes"
    * Orlowski, Andrew (August 12, 2004) â "DVD Jon cracks Airport music streaming"
    * Libbenga, Jan (January 2, 2004) â "DVD Jon wins again"
    * Clarke, Gavin (San Francisco. September 2, 2005) â "DVD Jon hacks Media Player file encryption"

  * Articles in Aftenposten : 
    * December 22, 2003 â "DVD-Jon wins new legal victory"
    * January 5, 2004 â "Prosecutors let DVD-Jon's victory stand"

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Jon Lech Johansen  
  * Jon Johansen's blog
  * Electronic Frontier Norway's link collection on the Jon Johansen case: Complete (Norwegian) version, English version (links only)
  * DVD Jon releases program to bypass iTunes DRM
  * Interview with DVD Jon â From slyck.com
  * CNN interview
  * Jon Lech Johansen talks to DVDfuture
  * "Meet the 21-yr-old Norwegian who defied Hollywood". WSJ. October 17, 2005. http://www.post-gazette.com/pg/05290/590139.stm.
  * Wired News: DVD Jon Lands Dream Job Stateside
  * Hacker Claims to Have Cracked iPod, iTunes (UCF Central Florida Future article)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jon_Lech_Johansen"

Categories: 1983 births | Living people | Internet personalities | Modern
cryptographers | Norwegian computer programmers | Norwegian expatriates in the
United States | Norwegians of Polish descent | People from Harstad

Hidden categories: Wikipedia proseline cleanup

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 12:01.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



