
# Flickr

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Flickr <IMG>  
URL Flickr.com  
Commercial? Yes  
Type of site photo/ video sharing and Photo/Video networking  
Available language(s) Chinese (traditional)  
English (original)  
French  
German  
Italian  
Portuguese (Brazilian)  
Spanish  
Korean  
Owner Yahoo! Inc.  
Created by Ludicorp  
Launched February 2004  
Alexa rank #30[1]  
Current status Active  
Flickr is an image and video hosting website, web services suite, and online
community platform. In addition to being a popular Web site for users to share
personal photographs, the service is widely used by bloggers as a photo
repository.[2] As of November 2008[update], it claims to host more than 3
billion images.[3][4][5]

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Corporate changes
  * 3 Features
    * 3.1 Organization
    * 3.2 Organizr
    * 3.3 Access control
    * 3.4 Interaction and compatibility
    * 3.5 Filtering
    * 3.6 Licensing
    * 3.7 Map sources
  * 4 Controversy
    * 4.1 Censorship
    * 4.2 Virgin Mobile ad copyright
    * 4.3 Yahoo! Photos
  * 5 The Commons
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] History

Flickr was developed by Ludicorp, a Vancouver-based company that launched
Flickr in February 2004. The service emerged out of tools originally created
for Ludicorp's Game Neverending, a web-based massively multiplayer online
game. Flickr proved a more feasible project and ultimately Game Neverending
was shelved.[6]

Early versions of Flickr focused on a multiuser chat room called FlickrLive
with real-time photo exchange capabilities. There was also an emphasis on
collecting images found on the web rather than photographs taken by users. The
successive evolutions focused more on the uploading and filing backend for
individual users and the chat room was buried in the site map. It was
eventually dropped as Flickr's backend systems evolved away from the Game
Neverending's codebase.

Some of the key features of Flickr not initially present were tags, marking
photos as favorites, group photo pools and interestingness, for which a patent
is pending.[7]

In March 2005, Yahoo! acquired Ludicorp and Flickr. During the week of June
28, 2005, all content was migrated from servers in Canada to servers in the
United States, resulting in all data being subject to United States federal
law.[8]

On May 16, 2006, Flickr updated its services from beta to "gamma", along with
a design and structural overhaul. According to the site's FAQ, the term
"gamma", rarely used in software development, is intended to be tongue-in-
cheek to indicate that the service is always being tested by its users, and is
in a state of perpetual improvement.[9] A further connotation, more specific
to photography and the display of images, is that of gamma correction. For all
intents and purposes, the current service is considered a stable release.

In December 2006, upload limits on free accounts were increased to 100MB a
month (from 20MB) and were removed from Pro Accounts, permitting unlimited
uploads for holders of these accounts (originally a 2GB per month limit).[10]

In January 2007, Flickr announced that "Old Skool" members--those who had
joined before the Yahoo acquisition--would be required to associate their
account with a Yahoo ID by March 15 to continue using the service.[11] This
move was criticized by some users.[12]

On April 9, 2008, Flickr began to allow paid subscribers to upload videos,
limited to 90 seconds in length and 150MB in size.

## [edit] Corporate changes

In June 2008, Flickr co-founder Stewart Butterfield announced his resignation
following his wife and co-founder Caterina Fake, who left the company on June
13, 2008.[13] Butterfield wrote a humorous resignation letter to Brad
Garlinghouse in which he stated that he was an old tin man in a new age.[14]

On December 11, 2008, The Guardian reported that three employees had been laid
off as Yahoo continued to reduce its workforce.[15]

## [edit] Features

### [edit] Organization

<IMG>

<IMG>

A screenshot of hot tags on Flickr

Flickr asks photo submitters to organize images using tags (a form of
metadata), which allow searchers to find images related to particular topics,
such as place names or subject matter. Flickr was also an early website to
implement tag clouds, which provide access to images tagged with the most
popular keywords. Because of its support for tags, Flickr has been cited as a
prime example of effective use of folksonomy, although Thomas Vander Wal
suggested Flickr is not the best example.[16]

Flickr also allows users to organize their photos into "sets", or groups of
photos that fall under the same heading. However, sets are more flexible than
the traditional folder-based method of organizing files, as one photo can
belong to one set, many sets, or none at all. Flickr's "sets", then, represent
a form of categorical metadata rather than a physical hierarchy. Sets may be
grouped into "collections", and collections further grouped into higher-order
collections.

Finally, Flickr offers a fairly comprehensive web-service API that allows
programmers to create applications that can perform almost any function a user
on the Flickr site can do.[17] To use the Flickr API, users need to know their
Flickr NSIDs. Several sites have been developed to aid users in this,
including idGettr[18] and What Is My Flickr Id.[19]

### [edit] Organizr

Organizr is a web application for organizing photos within a Flickr account
that can be accessed through the Flickr interface. It allows users to modify
tags, descriptions, and set groupings, and to place photos on a world map (a
feature provided in conjunction with Yahoo! Maps). It uses Ajax to emulate the
look, feel, and quick functionality of desktop-based photo-management
applications, such as Google's Picasa and F-Spot. Users can select and apply
changes to multiple photos at a time, making it a better tool for batch
editing than the standard Flickr interface.

### [edit] Access control

Flickr provides both private and public image storage. A user uploading an
image can set privacy controls that determine who can view the image. A photo
can be flagged as either public or private. Private images are visible by
default only to the uploader, but they can also be marked as viewable by
friends and/or family. Privacy settings also can be decided by adding
photographs from a user's photostream to a "group pool". If a group is private
all the members of that group can see the photo. If a group is public the
photo becomes public as well. Flickr also provides a "contact list" which can
be used to control image access for a specific set of users in a way similar
to that of LiveJournal.

In November 2006 Flickr created a "guest pass" system that allows private
photos to be shared with non Flickr members. For instance, a person could
email this pass to parents who may not have an account to allow them to see
the photos otherwise restricted from public view. This setting allows sets to
be shared, or all photos under a certain privacy category (friends or family)
to be shared.

In March 2007, Flickr added new content filtering controls that let members
specify by default what types of images they generally upload (photo,
art/illustration, or screenshot) and how "safe" (i.e., unlikely to offend
others) their images are, as well as specify that information for specific
images individually.[20] In addition, users can specify the same criteria when
searching for images. There are some restrictions on searches for certain
types of users: non-members must always use SafeSearch, which omits images
noted as potentially offensive, while members whose Yahoo! accounts indicate
that they are underage may use SafeSearch or moderate SafeSearch, but cannot
turn SafeSearch off completely.

Many members allow their photos to be viewed by anyone, forming a large
collaborative database of categorized photos. By default, other members can
leave comments about any image they have permission to view, and in many cases
can add to the list of tags associated with an image.

### [edit] Interaction and compatibility

Flickr's functionality includes RSS and Atom feeds and an API that allows
independent programmers to expand its services.

The core functionality of the site relies on standard HTML and HTTP features,
allowing for wide compatibility among platforms and browsers. Organizr uses
Ajax, with which most modern browsers are compliant, and most of Flickr's
other text-editing and tagging interfaces also possess Ajax functionality.

Images can be posted to the user's collection via email attachments, enabling
direct uploads from many cameraphones and applications with email
capabilities.

Flickr has increasingly been adopted by many web users as their primary photo
storage site, especially members of the weblog community. In addition, it is
popular with Macintosh and Linux users, who are locked out of photo-sharing
sites that require Windows and Internet Explorer.

Flickr uses the Geo microformat on the pages for over 3 million geotagged
images.[21]

Flickr Uploadr Image:FlickrUploadr.png  
Developed by Yahoo Inc.  
Latest release 3.1.4 / March 1, 2009  
Operating system Mac OS X, Windows Vista and XP  
License GPL  
Website http://www.flickr.com/tools/  
Flickr has entered into partnerships with third parties to offer printing of
various forms of merchandise, including business cards, photo books, and large
size prints.

Users of Windows Live Photo Gallery now have the ability to upload their
photos directly to Flickr.

Flickr provides a desktop client for Mac OS X and Windows that allows users to
upload photos without using the web interface. Uploadr allows drag-and-drop
batch uploading of photos, the setting of tags and descriptions for each
batch, and the editing of privacy settings.

### [edit] Filtering

In March 2007, Flickr introduced mandatory filtering of all photos and a
process of central review of photos by staff to set levels of appropriateness.
By default all Flickr accounts are set to the status appropriate for a minor
and must be changed by the user in their account.

Flickr has since used this setting to change the level of accessibility to
"unsafe" content for entire nations, including South Korea, Hong Kong, and
Germany. In summer 2007, German users staged a "revolt" over being assigned to
the user rights of a minor. [22] See Censorship controversy below.

The filter system of Flickr assumes that photos may be unsafe and should not
be public until a staff person has validated that the material is safe. Until
this happens, which could take up to a month, material cannot be viewed by
persons without a valid Yahoo and Flickr account. A Flickr site not marked as
safe can only be viewed by people in the community who have set their filters
beyond the default status of that of a âminorâ.

### [edit] Licensing

<IMG>

<IMG>

Breakdown of Creative Commons license use on Flickr. White = CC-BY; yellow =
CC-BY-SA; red = CC-BY-ND; blue = CC-BY-NC; green = CC-BY-SA-NC; purple = CC-
BY-NC-ND. (See image for details).

Flickr offers users the ability to release their images under certain common
usage licenses. The licensing options primarily include the Creative Commons
2.0 attribution-based and minor content-control licenses - although
jurisdiction and version-specific licenses cannot be selected. As with "tags",
the site allows easy searching of only those images that fall under a specific
license.[23]

### [edit] Map sources

In addition to using commercial mapping data, Flickr now uses OpenStreetMap
mapping for various cities; this began with Beijing during the run-up to the
2008 Olympic games. As of October 2008[update], this is used for Baghdad,
Beijing, Kabul, Sydney, and Tokyo.[24][25][26] OpenStreetMap data is collected
by volunteers and is available on a CC-BY-SA 2.0 license from Creative
Commons.

## [edit] Controversy

### [edit] Censorship

<IMG>

<IMG>

Users in mainland China could not see any images in Flickr when they log in.

On June 12, 2007, in the wake of the rollout of localized language versions of
the site, Flickr implemented a user-side rating system for filtering out
potentially controversial photos. Simultaneously, users with accounts
registered with Yahoo subsidiaries in Germany, Singapore, Hong Kong, and Korea
were prevented from viewing photos rated "moderate" or "restricted" on the
three-part scale used. Many Flickr users, particularly in Germany, protested
against the new restrictions, claiming unwanted censorship from Flickr and
Yahoo.[27]

Flickr management, unwilling to go into legal details, implied that the reason
for the stringent filtering was the unusually strict age-verification laws in
Germany. The issue received some attention in the German national media,
especially in online publications. Initial reports indicated that Flickr's
action was a sensible, if unattractive, precaution against prosecution,[28]
although later coverage implied that Flickr's action may have been
unnecessarily strict.[29]

On June 20, 2007 Flickr reacted by granting German users access to "moderate",
but not "restricted" images, and hinted at a future solution for Germany,
involving advanced age-verification procedures, though no mention was made of
Singapore, Hong Kong, or Korea.

Flickr is also blocked by the governments or ISPs of some countries. An
example is the UAE provider Etisalat.[citation needed]

Users in mainland China are no longer blocked by Chinese ISPs.[citation
needed]

### [edit] Virgin Mobile ad copyright

In 2007, Virgin Mobile launched a bus stop ad campaign promoting their
cellphone text messaging service using the work of amateur photographers who
uploaded their work to Flickr using a Creative Commons-by (Attribution)
license. Users licensing their images this way freed their work for use by any
other entity, as long as the original creator was attributed credit, without
any other compensation being required. Virgin upheld this single restriction
by printing a URL, leading to the photographer's Flickr page, on each of their
ads. However, one picture depicted 15 year-old Alison Chang at a fund-raising
carwash for her church,[30] for which Chang sued Virgin Mobile and Creative
Commons. The photo was taken by Alison's church youth counsellor, Justin Ho-
Wee Wong, who uploaded the image to Flickr under the Creative Commons
license.[30]

> The case hinges on privacy, the right of people not to have their likeness
used in an ad without permission. So, while Mr. Wong may have given away his
rights as a photographer, he did not, and could not, give away Alison's
rights. In the lawsuit, which Mr. Wong is also a party to, there is an
argument that Virgin did not honor all the terms of the nonrestrictive
license.

> â[30]

On November 27, 2007, Chang filed for a voluntary dismiss of the lawsuit
against Creative Commons,[31] focusing their lawsuit against Virgin
Mobile.[32] As of May 2008[update], the lawsuit is still pending [33]

### [edit] Yahoo! Photos

Yahoo announced that they would shut down Yahoo! Photos on September 20, 2007,
after which all photos would be deleted.[34][35] During the interim, users had
the ability to migrate their photos to Flickr or other services (including
Shutterfly, Kodak Gallery, Snapfish, and Photobucket). All who migrated to
Flickr were given three months of a Flickr Pro account.

## [edit] The Commons

Several museums and archives post images released under a "no known
restrictions" license, which was first made available on January 16, 2008. The
goal of the license is to "firstly show you hidden treasures in the world's
public photography archives, and secondly to show how your input and knowledge
can help make these collections even richer." Participants include George
Eastman House, Library of Congress, Brooklyn Museum, Nationaal Archief, State
Library of New South Wales, and Smithsonian Institution.[36][37]

## [edit] See also

  * Image hosting service
  * List of social networking websites
  * List of photo sharing websites
  * Photo sharing
  * User-generated content

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Alexa Top 500 Sites
  2. ^ "Photo Site a Hit With Bloggers". Wired, Daniel Terdiman. 12.09.04. http://www.wired.com/culture/lifestyle/news/2004/12/65958. Retrieved on 2008-08-28. "Flickr enables users to post photos from nearly any camera phone or directly from a PC. It also allows users to post photos from their accounts or from their cameras to most widely used blog services. The result is that an increasing number of bloggers are regularly posting photos from their Flickr accounts."
  3. ^ 3 Billion Photos On Flickr
  4. ^ "Flickr... 3 billion photos". DoesWhat. 2008-11-06. http://www.doeswhat.com/2008/11/06/flickr-3-billion-photos/. Retrieved on 2008-11-06.
  5. ^ Auchard, Eric (2007-11-19). "Flickr to map the world's latest photo hotspots". Reuters. http://www.reuters.com/article/technologyNews/idUSHO94233920071119. Retrieved on 2008-01-27.
  6. ^ Graham, Jefferson (2006-02-27). "Flickr of idea on a gaming project led to photo website". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/tech/products/2006-02-27-flickr_x.htm. Retrieved on 2006-09-04.
  7. ^ "US Patent Application 20060242139: Interestingness ranking of media objects". Butterfield; Daniel S. ; et al.. 2006-10-26. http://appft1.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO1&Sect2=HITOFF&d=PG01&p=1&u=/netahtml/PTO/srchnum.html&r=1&f=G&l=50&s1=%2220060242139%22.PGNR.&OS=DN/20060242139&RS=DN/20060242139. Retrieved on 2007-01-21.
  8. ^ "Data moving to U.S. very soon!". Flickr. 2005-06-10. http://www.flickr.com/forums/help/8280/. Retrieved on 2006-09-04.
  9. ^ "What does Flickr Gamma mean?". Flickr. http://flickr.com/help/general/#167. Retrieved on 2006-09-04.
  10. ^ "How many photos can I upload for free?". Flickr. http://www.flickr.com/help/limits/. Retrieved on 2007-05-16.
  11. ^ "Yahoo! IDs, signing in and screen names". Flickr. http://flickr.com/help/signin/. Retrieved on 2007-02-01.
  12. ^ "Flickr to require Yahoo usernames". BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/6316761.stm. Retrieved on 2007-06-15.
  13. ^ Flickr Co-founders Join Mass Exodus From Yahoo
  14. ^ Stewart Butterfield's bizarre resignation letter to Yahoo
  15. ^ http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/blog/2008/dec/11/yahoo-flickr-layoffs
  16. ^ Vander Wal, Thomas (2006-01-17). "Folksonomy Research Needs Cleaning Up". http://www.vanderwal.net/random/entrysel.php?blog=1781. Retrieved on 2006-09-04.
  17. ^ Flickr Services: API Documentation
  18. ^ [1]
  19. ^ What Is My Flickr Id
  20. ^ flickr.com / Help / FAQ / Content filters
  21. ^ Geo examples, in the wild
  22. ^ http://flickr.com/help/forum/en-us/43626/ Official Topid: German SafeSearch Settings
  23. ^ "Flickr: Help: Photos: How can I copyright my photos?". Flickr. http://www.flickr.com/help/photos/#87. Retrieved on 2007-11-12.
  24. ^ "Around the world and back again". blog-flickr.net. http://blog.flickr.net/en/2008/08/12/around-the-world-and-back-again/. Retrieved on 2008-11-07.
  25. ^ "More cities". blog-flickr.net. http://blog.flickr.net/en/2008/10/30/more-cities/. Retrieved on 2008-11-07.
  26. ^ "Japanese progress in osm. Amazing stuff!". http://thinkwhere.wordpress.com/2008/09/16/japan-osm-progress/.
  27. ^ heise online - Flickr filter raises eyebrows
  28. ^ Zwangsfilter: Flickr verbietet Deutschen Nacktfotos - Netzwelt - SPIEGEL ONLINE - Nachrichten
  29. ^ Foto-Portal: JugendschÃ¼tzer: Flickr-Filter nach deutschem Recht nicht nÃ¶tig - Netzwelt - SPIEGEL ONLINE - Nachrichten
  30. ^ a b c "Use My Photo? Not Without Permission.". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/10/01/technology/01link.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-25. "One moment, Alison Chang, a 15-year-old student from Dallas, is cheerfully goofing around at a local church-sponsored car wash, posing with a friend for a photo. Weeks later, that photo is posted online and catches the eye of an ad agency in Australia, and the altered image of Alison appears on a billboard in Adelaide as part of a Virgin Mobile advertising campaign."
  31. ^ From the Why-a-GC-from-Cravath-is-great Department: The lawsuit is over (Lessig Blog)
  32. ^ Gross, Grant (2007-12-01). "Lawsuit Against Creative Commons Dropped". PC World. http://www.pcworld.com/businesscenter/article/140189/lawsuit_against_creative_commons_dropped.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-25.
  33. ^ Chang et al v. Virgin Mobile USA LLC et al :: Justia News
  34. ^ "Yahoo Photos going dark as Flickr shines on". USAToday. http://www.usatoday.com/tech/webguide/2007-05-03-yahoo-photos-flickr_N.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-30.
  35. ^ Yodel Anecdotal Â» Blog Archive Â» Give your Photos the fun of Flickr
  36. ^ "More about The Commons". Flickr. http://www.flickr.com/commons?PHPSESSID=ea7b4da468f5935f24b65f41dbfc356f. Retrieved on 2009-02-02.
  37. ^ "Historical Photos in Web Archives Gain Vivid New Lives". New York Times. January 18, 2009. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/19/technology/internet/19link.html?_r=1&partner=permalink&exprod=permalink. Retrieved on 2009-02-02. "In a similar move to harness the publicâs knowledge about old photographs, the Library of Congress a year ago began adding photographs with no known restrictions to a Flickr service called the Commons. The Library of Congress started with 3,500 photos and adds 50 a week."

## [edit] External links

  * Official site
  * Flickr Blog
  * Ludicorp corporate website

v â¢ d â¢ e

Yahoo! Inc  
Advertising

AMP! Â· Panama Â· Search Marketing Â· Yahoo! Publisher Network  
Developer Networks and Resources

Developer Network Â· Gallery Â· Next  
Search

blo.gs Â· BOSS Â· Directory Â· Finance Â· Groups Â· HotJobs Â· Kelkoo Â·
LAUNCHcast (powered by CBS Radio) Â· Maps Â· Movies Â· Music Â· News Â· omg!
Â· Sports Â· Video Â· Web  
Communication and Publishing

360Â° Â· Answers Â· Avatars Â· Buzz Â· Flickr Â· Delicious Â· Fire Eagle Â·
Games Â· GeoCities Â· Go Â· JumpCut Â· Live Â· Mail Â· Messenger Â· Mobile Â·
MyBlogLog Â· Pipes Â· Rivals Â· Wallet Â· Web Hosting Â· Upcoming Â· Voice Â·
Zimbra  
Computer Applications

Widgets Â· Messenger Â· Music Jukebox Â· The All-Seeing Eye Â· Toolbar  
Former Products and Services

Auctions Â· Briefcase Â· Broadcast.com Â· Desktop Search Â· Mash Â· Musicmatch
Jukebox Â· Music Unlimited Â· Photos Â· Podcasts Â· RocketMail Â· WebRing  
Co-branded Internet service

AT&T Â· BT Â· Rogers Â· Verizon ( DSL Â· FiOS )  
See also

Acquisitions Â· Alibaba Â· Criticism Â· Time Capsule  
Annual Revenue: â²US$6.7 Billion (2007) Â· Employees: 14,000 (2009)  
Stock Symbol: (NASDAQ: YHOO) Â· Website: Yahoo.com  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flickr"

Categories: Image hosting | Video hosting | Photography websites | Online
social networking | Online companies | Web 2.0 | Yahoo! | Internet properties
established in 2002 | Keyhole Markup Language | Photo sharing | Social
information processing

Hidden categories: Articles containing potentially dated statements from
November 2008 | All articles containing potentially dated statements |
Articles containing potentially dated statements from October 2008 | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since
January 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 |
Articles containing potentially dated statements from May 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * å´è¯­
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 15:25.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



