
# Mark Foley scandal

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may be too long to comfortably read and navigate. Please consider
splitting content into sub-articles and using this article for a summary of
the key points of the subject.  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Mark Foley

The Mark Foley scandal, which broke in late September 2006, centers on
soliciting e-mails and sexually explicit instant messages sent by Mark Foley,
a Republican Congressman from Florida, to teenaged boys who had formerly
served as congressional pages. Investigation was closed by the FLDE on
September 19, 2008 citing insufficient evidence to pursue criminal
charges.[1][2][3] The scandal has grown to encompass the response of
Republican congressional leaders to previous complaints about Foley's contacts
with the pages and inconsistencies in the leaders' public
statements.[4][5][6][7][8] There are also allegations that a second Republican
Congressman, Jim Kolbe, had improper conduct with at least two youths, a
16-year old page and a recently graduated page.[9][10]

The scandal led to Foley's resignation from Congress on September 29, 2006. In
some quarters, the scandal is believed to have contributed to the Republican
Party's loss of control over Congress in the November 7, 2006 election, as
well as the end of House Speaker Dennis Hastert's leadership of the House
Republicans. Kirk Fordham, chief of staff to Rep. Tom Reynolds and former
chief of staff for Foley, also resigned as a result of the scandal.

The questionable conversations, which took place between 1995[11][12][13] and
2005, are under investigation by the FBI for possible criminal violations. In
September 2008, Florida officials investigating Foley decided not to charge
him, citing a lack of evidence and the expiration of the statute of
limitations. [14]The House Ethics Committee is investigating the response of
the House Republican leadership and their staff to earlier warnings of Foley's
conduct.[15] In early October 2006, two news organizations quoted anonymous
former pages saying they had sexual liaisons with Foley after turning 18 and
21.[16][17]

Foley was chairman of the House Caucus on Missing and Exploited Children,
which introduced legislation targeting sexual predators and created stricter
guidelines for tracking them.

## Contents

  * 1 Messages
    * 1.1 E-mails
    * 1.2 Instant messages
    * 1.3 Sources of messages and chronology
  * 2 Physical contact
    * 2.1 Visits and meetings
    * 2.2 Sexual liaisons
  * 3 Foley's response
  * 4 Priest's alleged childhood molestation of Foley
  * 5 Other Congressmen
    * 5.1 Jim Kolbe
    * 5.2 Unnamed congressman
  * 6 Congress
    * 6.1 Knowledge before September 2006
      * 6.1.1 1995-1999
      * 6.1.2 2000â2004
      * 6.1.3 2005â2006
    * 6.2 House Page Board
    * 6.3 Role of Leadership members
      * 6.3.1 Dennis Hastert
      * 6.3.2 Tom Reynolds
      * 6.3.3 John Shimkus
      * 6.3.4 John Boehner
  * 7 Investigations
    * 7.1 House Ethics Committee
    * 7.2 Justice Department
  * 8 Responses
  * 9 Political impact
    * 9.1 Post-scandal polls and commentary
    * 9.2 Effect in Foley's district
    * 9.3 Effect in Reynolds's district
    * 9.4 Effect on other congressional races
  * 10 Page program
  * 11 Legal issues
    * 11.1 Age of consent
    * 11.2 Sexual communications with minors
    * 11.3 Alcohol use
  * 12 See also
  * 13 References
  * 14 External links

  
## [edit] Messages

### [edit] E-mails

In 2005, Foley sent five e-mails to a 16-year-old former page from Monroe,
Louisiana[18] sponsored by Rep. Rodney Alexander (R-LA). They were the first
messages to be made public in the scandal.[19][20] Among other things, Foley
asked for a photo of the page, his age and birthday, and what he wanted for a
birthday present. Foley observed that another male page (to whom he had also
written) was "in really great shape... i am just finished riding my bike on a
25 mile journey..." The page forwarded the e-mails to a colleague in
Alexander's office, saying "this really freaked me out," and repeating the
word "sick" 13 times in a row to describe the photo request. The page asked
"if you can, please tell Rodney [Alexander] about this," and in addition,
mentioned a female page who had been warned about a Congressman who "hit on"
interns.[21][22][23]

ABC News reported on October 5 that in 2002, Foley e-mailed one page with an
invitation to stay at the congressman's home in exchange for oral sex. The
page, who was 17 years old at the time, declined the offer. The same report
stated that he e-mailed another with a request for a photograph of his erect
penis.[16] Another former page reports that he saw sexually explicit e-mails
sent to one page from his page class of 2001-2002, and learned of "three or
four" pages from that class who received similar e-mails.[24]

### [edit] Instant messages

After the initial story on the e-mails, other pages contacted ABC and the
Washington Post, providing transcripts of sexually explicit instant messaging
(IM) conversations from 2003 that Foley had with two pages under the age of 18
at the time.[3][25][26] The Washington Post reported that it had received its
copies of these same IMs from a page who had served on Capitol Hill with the
two pages who received them.[27]

Another former page, Tyson Vivyan, has said that he received "sexually
suggestive" messages from Foley in 1997, a month after he left the page
program.[13] A page from the class of 1998 also reported receiving explicit
IMs from Foley.[16] A page from the class of 2000 reported that he chatted
with Foley during the Congressman's 2000 visit to the page dormitory (see
Visits and Meetings below), and that afterwards, he began receiving e-mails
and IMs from Foley, which became explicit immediately after his 18th
birthday.[28]

### [edit] Sources of messages and chronology

In November 2005, the initial five e-mails were leaked out of Alexander's
office, after the recipient (a page whom Alexander sponsored) brought them to
the Congressman.[19]

Two Florida newspapers, the St. Petersburg Times and the Miami Herald, and the
Fox News Channel acquired copies of these e-mails in November 2005, but
decided not to publish a story.[29][30][31] According to an editor at the St.
Petersburg Times, they received the e-mails from a source in Alexander's
office.[32]

The St. Petersburg Times editors decided the exchange was probably just
"friendly chit-chat". Nonetheless, they assigned two reporters to investigate
in November 2005. The recipient of the e-mail refused to cooperate with the
story, and no other pages they interviewed had complaints about correspondence
with Foley. The Times revisited their investigation "more than once",
ultimately choosing not to break the story.[33]

Ken Silverstein, an editor at Harper's Magazine, said that he received copies
of the five e-mails in May 2006 from a "Democratic operative". Silverstein
subsequently wrote a story on the e-mails, which was cancelled due to a lack
of absolute proof that Foley was anything more than "creepy," He said that his
source "was not working in concert with the national Democratic Party" but was
"genuinely disgusted" by Foley's behavior. Silverstein himself passed the
information to other media organizations after cancelling the story.[34]

In July 2006, a paid Republican Congressional staffer sent copies of the
e-mails to several Washington media organizations through an intermediary.
[35] The organization Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington
(CREW) said it received copies of the e-mails on July 21 and turned them over
to the FBI that same day. (See Justice Department investigation, below.)

In August 2006, ABC News reporter Brian Ross received the initial e-mails from
a Republican source. He did not write a story for over a month because he was
working on other stories.[36]

On September 24, 2006, the e-mails were released by Lane Hudson on his
anonymous blog Stop Sex Predators. Hudson was at the time employed by the
Human Rights Campaign. When the HRC found out about Hudson's activity during
the week of October 25, 2006, it publicly fired him for misusing its
resources.[37] At the time of his firing, the Board of Directors of HRC
included Jeff Trandahl, who also had prior knowledge and involvement with the
issue.

The political humor blog Wonkette drew readers' attention to the posted
e-mails on September 27.[38] The next day, September 28, Ross reported on the
e-mails which he had received in August.[31][36]

After that initial story, two sources brought copies of more explicit instant
messages to ABC News and the Washington Post. Both were former pages â the
first was a Republican who would "never vote for a Democrat", and the second
was a Democrat from the same class as the two pages who received the
messages.[19]

## [edit] Physical contact

In early-October 2006, two news organizations quoted anonymous former pages as
saying that they had sexual liaisons with Foley after they turned 18 and 21,
respectively.[16][17]

### [edit] Visits and meetings

On at least two different occasions, one in the summer of 2000 and one in 2002
or 2003, Foley allegedly visited the dormitory where pages live. On the first
occasion, he drove up in his BMW automobile during a nighttime "mixer" party.
Students came out of the dorm to talk with him and were warned away by an
adult supervisor in the page program, who shooed them back inside.[28]

In the second visit, Newsweek Magazine reported that Foley showed up at the
dormitory after the 10 P.M. curfew, apparently drunk, and attempted to enter
the building. He was reportedly turned away by a security guard.[32]

Other non-sexual meetings include a dinner with one former page, then 17,
after which he invited the youth back to his hotel room and "touched his
leg"[39], and a visit by two pages in 1997 to Foley's Washington condo where
they consumed pizza and soda.[13] Another page reported that Foley repeatedly
invited him out for ice cream.[40]

### [edit] Sexual liaisons

Though Foley is not alleged to have engaged in sexual relations with pages
during the time of their service, he allegedly entered, on at least two
occasions, into sexual relationships with ex-pages.

In communications with one of the pages, who has chosen to remain anonymous,
Foley appears to emphasize that while he assesses the attractions and
orientation of pages, he waits until they have left the program to engage the
youth in erotic activities: "I always knew you were a player but I don't fool
around with pages."[17]

The Los Angeles Times contacted the anonymous former page, according to a
report in the paper on October 8, "after others identified him as someone
whose contacts with Foley went beyond graphic messages."[17] The page said
that after leaving the page program, he began receiving instant messages from
Maf54 that quickly became provocative in nature. According to the Times:

â In the messages, Maf54 described how years earlier, he had looked to see
whether the former page had an erection in his tight white pants while the
then-teenager was working near the congressman. Maf54 also speculated about
the sexual attributes of other males in the same page class, including the
observation that one young man was "well hung." ...

In one 2000 message, Maf54 inquired about the length and direction of the
youth's erection.

"I always thought you were gay," Maf54 commented.

"Is it obvious?" the former page asked.[17]

â  
The ex-page says that in the fall of 2000, when he was 21 years old, he
engaged in sexual intercourse with Foley at the congressman's Washington
residence. According to the former page's account, "[t]he two had wine and
pizza on a backyard patio and then retired to a spare bedroom."[17]

Another former page told ABC News that Foley arranged a sexual liaison with
him but only after he turned 18.[16]

## [edit] Foley's response

After the initial e-mails were publicized, Foley's office confirmed that Foley
had sent the messages but said they were innocuous, and accused his election
opponent of orchestrating a smear.[36]

Shortly after being questioned by ABC about the more explicit IMs -- and
before they had been publicly revealed -- Foley resigned from
Congress.[41][42] The congressman issued a statement, saying, "I am deeply
sorry and I apologize for letting down my family and the people of Florida I
have had the privilege to represent."

Kirk Fordham, Chief of Staff to Representative and National Republican
Congressional Committee Chairman Tom Reynolds of New York, and former Chief of
Staff to Foley, said that he was with Foley when ABC confronted him with the
explicit IMs. Fordham said that he asked Foley if they were authentic, and
that Foley replied, "Probably."[43] According to Newsweek, Foley "knew he was
finished." Fordham then visited GOP headquarters to inform Hastert and
Reynolds; he returned with a one-sentence resignation letter that Foley
signed.[44] A short time later, Foley submitted his resignation to Governor
Jeb Bush and left the capital.

Once the scandal broke in full, Foley had virtually no chance of staying in
Congress. Hastert and Reynolds let it be known that if Foley didn't sign the
resignation letter, they would have sought his expulsion from the House. Polls
showed him losing badly to his Democratic challenger, businessman Tim Mahoney.
Even if Foley had come back to win, it is very unlikely the House would have
seated him.

On October 2, Foley checked himself into a rehabilitation clinic for
alcoholism.[45] On October 3 Foleyâs lawyer stated, "Mark Foley has never,
ever had inappropriate sexual contact with a minor in his life. He is
absolutely, positively not a pedophile." He also stated that Foley himself was
a victim of sexual assault by an unnamed clergyman as a child, that the
inappropriate conversations were the result of a secret alcohol problem and
primarily occurred while Foley was intoxicated, and that Foley is gay.[46][47]
[48][49][50] Previously, when confronted with speculations that he was gay,
Foley labeled them "revolting and unforgivable."[51] However, Foley's
homosexuality had been an open secret in Washington for many years.[44]

## [edit] Priest's alleged childhood molestation of Foley

After demands to do so,[52][53] Foley privately identified the priest he
alleged had abused him as a child. However, the public revelation of his
identity, Anthony Mercieca, a 69-year old Catholic priest now living in Malta,
came through the investigative reporting of the Sarasota Herald-Tribune.[54]

Parallel to Foley's disclosure, Mercieca held several interviews in which he
described a two-year relationship with Foley from when the youth was a
thirteen-year-old altar boy at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church in Lake
Worth, Florida until he was fifteen. He told the Sarasota Herald-Tribune about
a number of intimate occasions that the priest claimed "Foley might perceive
as sexually inappropriate," such as "massaging Foley while the boy was naked,
skinny-dipping together at a secluded lake in Lake Worth and being naked in
the same room on overnight trips." Mercieca hinted at an even more intimate
event, which he claimed took place while he was under the influence of
tranquilizers and alcohol, and which he could not clearly recollect, and that
he taught Foley "some wrong things" related to sex, which he did not
specify.[55]

In a separate AP interview, he recounted that: "We were friends and trusted
each other as brothers and loved each other as brothers. It was not what you
call intercourse...There was no rape or anything...Maybe light touches here or
there."[56] And he told a Florida TV station that it wasn't abuse, which is
against someone's will: "He seemed to like it, you know? So it was sort of
more like a spontaneous thing." The Archdiocese of Miami issued a statement
apologizing to Foley for "the hurt he experienced" from the priest's "morally
reprehensible" actions, and suspended Mercieca's faculties.[57]

According to Mercieca, he last saw Foley at a dinner meeting 18 years ago in a
restaurant in Fort Worth.[58] When asked whether he had anything to say to
Foley, Mercieca said, "Remember the good times we had together, you know, and
how well we enjoyed each otherâs company." He added, "Donât keep dwelling
on this thing, you know?"[59] Mercieca cannot be prosecuted for his activities
with Foley since the relevant statutes of limitations have expired, and the
Palm Beach County state attorney's office "cannot conduct an investigation
because Foley has declined to press charges."[57]

A childhood friend of Foley's, Jon Ombres, confirmed the close friendship
between the two, and suggested that there may have been a second priest,
sexually interested in youths and with whom Foley was on good terms, active in
the parish at that time.[55] As of October 25, Mercieca faced new accusations,
leveled by a former altar boy who claims having been abused by him in the
seventies at the age of twelve.[60] Mercieca, speaking through his lawyer, has
denied the second accusation, claiming that it is "at best as a figment of the
imagination and at worst a malicious fabrication." On July 18, 2007, the Roman
Catholic Archdiocese of Miami settled a lawsuit brought up against it by the
former altar boy. The terms of the settlement were not disclosed. The lawsuit
had sought more than $10,000,000 in damages.[61]

## [edit] Other Congressmen

As an apparent result of the Foley scandal, allegations of inappropriate
contact with pages have been made against other congressmen.

### [edit] Jim Kolbe

Two allegations were made against another Republican Congressman, Jim Kolbe.
The first to be made public involves a 1996 rafting trip Kolbe took on the
Colorado River with two recently graduated, 17-year-old male pages, as well as
Kolbe's sister, five of his staffers, and Gary Cummins, the deputy
superintendent of the Grand Canyon National Park at the time. An anonymous
participant told NBC that he was "creeped out" by the attention Kolbe paid to
one of the pages, adding that Kolbe did a lot of "fawning, petting and
touching" on the teenager's arms, shoulders and back. The page in question
declined to address that statement, telling NBC, "I just don't want to get
into this... because I might possibly be considered for a job in the
administration." He did say that he had a "blast" on the trip and did not
report anything improper to his parents or page officials afterwards.[10]

On the day that the Justice Department investigation of the first allegation
was made public, October 12, 2006, Kolbe's spokeswoman Korenna Cline said that
his office had not been contacted by the Justice Department or House Ethics
Committee. She then resigned abruptly, saying "I have decided to pursue
another job opportunity and today is my last day."[62]

In the second allegation, a page told the FBI and House Clerk's office that he
was "uncomfortable with a particular social encounter" including physical
contact that occurred in 2001 when he and Kolbe were alone. The page was 16 at
the time and did not report the incident then.[9]

These allegations have also been the topic of a recent conference call between
the members of the House Page Review Board,[63] which referred the matter to
the House Ethics Committee since they don't have jurisdiction over
Congressmen.[9]

Trandahl, speaking as the former House Clerk, reportedly has stated that Kolbe
was one of a small group of "problem members" of congress who frequently
socialized with House pages in inappropriate ways.[64]

### [edit] Unnamed congressman

Congressman Jerry Weller (R-IL) sent the House Page Board and House Ethics
Committee a report that a page he sponsored was "inappropriately invited to a
social function by another congressman." He declined to make any further
details public.[65]

## [edit] Congress

Other leaders whose roles have been criticized include Reynolds, John Boehner,
John Shimkus, Ken Mehlman,[66] and Sue W. Kelly.[67]

Also significant in the scandal is the office of Clerk of the House of
Representatives is the Chief Administrative Officer of the United States House
of Representatives. The Clerk is responsible for the effective administration
of all personnel matters, including those relating to the house pages. The two
Clerks of the House during the scandal were Jeff Trandahl and Karen Haas; the
latter was elevated to the position from being floor assistant for Hastert[68]
after Trandahl resigned on November 18, 2005.[69][70]

### [edit] Knowledge before September 2006

At least thirteen Republican Congressmen or congressional staffers have
acknowledged that they knew of the five initial e-mails before they were made
public: Majority Leader John Boehner (Ohio); Reynolds; Alexander and John
Shimkus (Ill.) (Chairman of the House Page Board); Hastert, Mike Stokke, Ted
Van Der Meid, and Tim Kennedy in Hastert's office; Paula Nowakowski,
Boehnerâs chief of staff; Trandahl; Alexanderâs chief of staff (Royal
Alexander, no relation)[71] and another Alexander staffer, Danielle Savoy,[72]
Fordham; Kolbe,[73] and Kolbe's staffer.[74]

No Democratic Congressman or staffers have been shown to have had such
knowledge.[75](Except for the House Democratic Caucus and the Democratic
Congressional Campaign Committee.)[76]

#### [edit] 1995-1999

Kurt Wolfe, the journalist who first outed Foley in The Advocate in 1996, said
that one of the original independent sources he found to corroborate Foley's
orientation was an ex-page. An adult by the time of his meeting with Wolfe, he
described having been "the recipient of many inappropriate sexual
communications from Foley" while a minor. Wolfe contacted Foley's office for
comment, and was rebuffed. Nevertheless, he asserts about Foley's staff: "They
were notified." [11]

Several current and former congressional employees recalled Foley approaching
young male pages at parties, going back many years, and say that warnings
about him were commonly passed around. Generally speaking, he was "known to be
extraordinarily friendly in a way that made some [pages] uncomfortable."
According to Mark Beck-Heyman, who served as a Republican page in summer 1995,
"Almost the first day I got there I was warned. It was no secret that Foley
had a special interest in male pages." [40] He charged that many people on
Capitol Hill, including Republican staffers, "have known for over 11 years
about what was going on and chose to do nothing."[12] Tony Perkins, president
of the conservative Family Research Council, said on MSNBC that "Iâve had
people now on staff that used to be pages, and it was widely known to watch
out for him, that he liked boys ... so pages were warned to watch out for
him."[77]

#### [edit] 2000â2004

On October 9, The Washington Post reported that in 2000, a former page showed
Kolbe messages from Foley that made the page feel uncomfortable. According to
The Washington Post, these messages were sexually explicit, a characterization
that Kolbe's press secretary denied. The Washington Post reported that Kolbe
confronted Foley about the messages. Kolbe's press secretary said that
unspecified "corrective action" was taken. [73] Kolbe later said that the
former page, whom Kolbe had sponsored, told him of a "creepy" e-mail from
Foley, but did not show it to him. Kolbe said that, through his staff, he
passed the complaint on to Trandahl and to Foley's office. Kolbe said that he
did not confront Foley about the matter, and that he recalled that the
incident had taken place later than 2000.[74]

Another page, Matthew Loraditch, stated that when he served in 2001 pages had
been warned to "watch out for Congressman Mark Foley," [78] though he later
softened his description of the warning.[79]

Newsweek Magazine reported that in 2002 or 2003, Foley showed up at the pages'
dormitory after the 10 P.M. curfew, apparently drunk, and attempted to enter
the building. He was reportedly turned away by a security guard. Newsweek
stated that Trandahl notified Fordham (then Foley's Chief of Staff and later
Congressman Tom Reynolds' chief of staff), and that Fordham in turn contacted
Scott B. Palmer, Hastert's chief of staff, describing Foley's behavior
generally but not mentioning the incident at the pages' dormitory. This
account further stated that Fordham followed up a couple of days later with
Palmer, who replied that he had "informed the Speaker" and "dealt with it" by
talking to Foley directly.[80]

Testifying under oath before a House ethics committee panel, Fordham said that
months before he left Foley's office in January 2004, he had told Hastert's
office about the conduct by Mark Foley with male teenage pages.[81] Palmer has
categorically denied that meeting between him and Fordham ever took place:
"What Kirk Fordham says happened did not happen." However, on October 6 a
second congressional staffer corroborated Fordham's version of the events,
claiming that in 2003 a meeting took place between Palmer and Foley,
specifically to discuss complaints about his behavior towards pages.[70]

Trandahl, testifying to a closed session of the House Ethics Committee,
reportedly also confirmed that Hastert's office was notified of Mr. Foley's
behavior in 2003. He stated that he regularly updated Hastert's counsel and
floor manager, Ted Van Der Meid, about a "problem group of members and staff
who spent too much time socializing with pages outside of official duties."
One member of the group was Foley.[82][83]

#### [edit] 2005â2006

Rep. Rodney Alexander (R-LA) stated that he learned of the five initial
e-mails from Foley to the 16-year old page from Louisiana in the fall of 2005,
after a news reporter brought the matter to his attention.[21] Alexander spoke
to the boy's parents, who did not wish to pursue the matter beyond stopping
the e-mails. Alexander's chief of staff met with Mike Stokke, Hastert's deputy
chief of staff in the fall of 2005.[21][84][85] They met with Trandahl.
Contradictory statements have made it unclear whether they actually read the
e-mails.[4][84][86] Trandahl then met with Shimkus, and Shimkus and Trandahl
met privately with Foley, and Shimkus told him to cease contact with the page.
The other two congressional representatives on the House Page committee
(including the only Democrat) were not informed, and no formal investigative
or disciplinary action was taken.[87]

After testifying in closed session before the House Ethics Committee, Rep.
Alexander also announced that âThere are many people who know what we know,
and have known it for a lot longer period of time than weâve known.â He
did not name names publicly, however.[88]

In the spring of 2006, Rep. Alexander mentioned the case to Boehner, who
referred him to Rep. Reynolds (R-NY), chairman of the National Republican
Congressional Committee. Both Reynolds and Boehner say that they notified
Hastert; he says he can't recall that and questions whether it is true.[85]

When the story became public, Hastert said that he had learned of the e-mails
only when the news broke in late September, 2006.[89] Reynolds said on
September 30 that he had spoken with Hastert about the matter early in 2006
after being approached by Alexander to discuss the matter. According to The
Washington Post, "Republican insiders said Reynolds spoke out because he was
angry that Hastert appeared willing to let him take the blame for the party
leadership's silence." Hastert's office said that Hastert did not "explicitly
recall" that conversation but said he did not dispute it.[90]

Boehner told The Washington Post that he had learned of the emails in the
spring. Boehner initially said that he informed Hastert, and that Hastert
assured him "we're taking care of it." After Hastert denied knowledge to the
press, Boehner retracted his statement, stating that he could not recall the
conversation.[89] Boehner later stated that he was "99 percent" sure he had
informed Hastert.[91]

### [edit] House Page Board

A board consisting of three House members and two congressional staffers,
chaired by Shimkus, supervises the House page program.[63] The staffers, who
are automatic members, are the House Clerk and the House Sergeant At Arms.[92]

Although Shimkus was aware of the five initially reported e-mails in 2005, he
did not inform the rest of the board aside from Trandahl. Shimkus said he "was
asked to keep this in confidence" because the parents of the page didn't want
the incident publicized.[93] The other two representatives on the board, Dale
Kildee (D-MI) and Shelley Moore Capito (R-WV) did not find out about them
until the scandal broke in October 2006. Kildee said that he was "very upset"
that he had not been informed of the e-mails. He said, "I should have been
told. The whole House Page Board should have been told."[94] Capito said that
she would have recommended stronger action had she been made aware of the
original e-mails.[95]

There are separate supervisors for the Republican and Democratic pages. Peggy
Sampson has supervised Republican pages since 1986, and several former pages
say that she warned them about Mark Foley.[96] Wren Ivester is the supervisor
of Democratic pages. No Democratic pages have said they were warned about
Foley, and several contacted by ABC News said they had not been told about
him.[78] Both supervisors testified before a closed session of the House
Ethics Committee on October 11, 2006.[97]

On October 16, 2006, the Board held a conference call to discuss allegations
in the Kolbe incident in 1996 (discussed above).[63]

### [edit] Role of Leadership members

#### [edit] Dennis Hastert

Hastert claimed at first that he had learned of the e-mails only when the news
broke on September 29, 2006[98] and repeated this declaration on October
5.[99] Two other top leaders in the House, Boehner and Reynolds, however, have
stated that they told Hastert about the Foley emails in the spring of 2006.
Boehner added that Hastert replied that the complaint "had been taken care
of", and confirmed his account under oath before the House Ethics
Committee.[100] A September 30 statement by the Speaker's office said that
Hastert did not "explicitly recall" the conversation with Reynolds but "has no
reason to dispute" it.[84][90][101]

Hastert's office concedes, in its own chronology, that his top staffers Mike
Stokke (deputy chief of staff), Ted Van Der Meid (legal counsel) and a lower
placed assistant named Tim Kennedy were told about the Foley emails by Rep.
Alexander's chief of staff in November 2005.[84] They deny that Scott Palmer
knew about the emails until they were made public, though. Hastert is
unusually close to his top staffers; he lives with Palmer and Stokke, who have
worked for him for decades, and they commute back to Illinois together on
weekends.[15]

Fordham, who had been Foley's chief of staff until January 2004, and chief of
staff to Congressman Reynolds from 2005 until he resigned on October 4, 2006,
said that he told Scott Palmer about Foley's interest in pages in 2003, that
Palmer met with Foley, and that Hastert knew about the meeting.[102] Palmer
replied that "What Kirk Fordham said did not happen",[103] but on October 6 a
second congressional staffer corroborated Fordham's account, claiming that a
2003 meeting took place between Palmer and Foley specifically to discuss
complaints about his behavior towards pages.[70]

At an October 2 press conference, Hastert called the IMs "vile and repulsive."
He also said that had Foley not resigned, he would have demanded his expulsion
from the House. He also condemned Foley for misleading him, Shimkus and the
organizations with whom he'd worked to strengthen laws against exploiting
children.[104] Hastert requested a criminal investigation of the explicit IMs,
but not of the earlier, less explicit e-mails exchanged between Foley and the
page sponsored by Alexander.[105]

However, the following day, on the Rush Limbaugh Show he altered his account
of Foley's departure from the House, now taking credit for having "asked him
to resign." The new version was repeated uncritically by a number of media
sources, which did not challenge the contradiction.[106]

On October 3, the Washington Times called for Hastert's resignation as Speaker
over his handling of the scandal.[107] Prominent conservatives also have
called for Hastert's resignation, such as David Bossie, president of Citizens
United; conservative columnist Richard Viguerie; and conservative columnist
Michael Reagan, son of former President Ronald Reagan.[108] Hastert has
rebuffed these calls to resign, arguing he did nothing wrong and is committed
to investigating the scandal and leading Congress.[109] Boehner also defended
Hastert in a letter to the editor of Washington Times. A conference call on
October 2 with about 100 House Republicans had no calls for a
resignation.[110]

On October 5, Hastert accepted responsibility for the scandal but refused to
step down. He said, "I haven't done anything wrong" and re-affirmed that he
had only recently learned about any problems involving Foley and the pages: "I
learned of this last Friday... I don't know who knew what or when--that's why
we've asked for an investigation."[99]

#### [edit] Tom Reynolds

Reynolds issued a statement that he had spoken with Hastert about the matter
early in 2006. According to The Washington Post, "Republican insiders said
Reynolds spoke out because he was angry that Hastert appeared willing to let
him take the blame for the party leadership's silence."[90] Hastert did not
"explicitly recall" that conversation but said he did not dispute it.[84]

Reynolds commented on his role in the events, "I don't think I went wrong at
all...I don't know what else I could have done."[111]

The question of Reynolds's role in the scandal nearly cost him his seat in the
November 2006 election. According to conservative columnist Robert Novak,
Reynolds convinced a reluctant Foley to run for re-election even after finding
out about his questionable e-mails.[112] Reynolds also contributed $5,000 to
Foley's re-election fund, apparently after finding out about his
behavior.[113] Indeed, Reynolds won reelection by only four percentage points
despite representing a district that had been altered specifically to protect
him.[citation needed]

On October 4, 2006, Fordham, Reynolds's Chief of Staff, resigned after
newspapers reported that he had asked ABC News not to report the text of the
sexually explicit instant messages. ABC reported that Fordham had offered to
give them an exclusive on the resignation if they withheld the text of the
IMs. Fordham had previously served as Foley's Chief of Staff.[114] Fordham
told The Associated Press that he had warned Hastert's staff about Foley in
2003.[115] Hastert's spokesman replied, "What Kirk Fordham said never
happened."[116][117]

It has been reported that prior to the public scandal, Reynolds, together with
Karl Rove, urged Foley to run for reelection in 2006, despite Foley's
reluctance.[118]

#### [edit] John Shimkus

Shimkus said "that in late-2005 he learned--through information passed along
by Alexander's office--about an e-mail exchange in which Foley asked about the
youngster's well-being after Hurricane Katrina and requested a
photograph."[36] Shimkus advised Foley not to contact the boy again, and Foley
assured him he would not. Shimkus did not share the information with Reps.
Kildee or Capito, the other members of the Page Board.

Shimkus later described Foley as a "slimeball," and regretted not pressing
further. Unlike Reynolds, he had little difficulty winning reelection.

#### [edit] John Boehner

Boehner told The Washington Post that he learned of the inappropriate contact
in the spring. Boehner initially said that he informed Hastert, and that
Hastert assured him "we're taking care of it." After Hastert denied knowledge
of this conversation, Boehner retracted, saying that he could not recall
it.[89] On October 3, Boehner once again recanted, this time telling a radio
interviewer "I believe I talked to the Speaker and he told me it had been
taken care of."[119]

## [edit] Investigations

### [edit] House Ethics Committee

Late on September 29, 2006, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) offered
a resolution to direct the House Ethics Committee to create a subcommittee to
investigate Foley and the Republican leadership. Boehner moved to immediately
refer Pelosi's resolution to the Ethics Committee without further debate and
the House unanimously agreed.[120][121]

On October 5, 2006, the House Ethics Committee met and established a
subcommittee to investigate the page sex scandal.[122] The House subcommittee
members are Reps. Doc Hastings (R-WA), Howard Berman (D-CA), Judy Biggert
(R-IL), and Stephanie Tubbs Jones (D-OH). The subcommittee has already sent
subpoenas and has appointed Louis Freeh as a special advisor. The committee
opened an expansive investigation into the unfolding scandal on 5 October 2006
by approving nearly four dozen subpoenas for witnesses and documents.[123]

The Ethics Committee has no power over Foley, who is no longer a member of
Congress. As a result, its chairman has said it will focus on the "conduct of
House members, officers and staff related to information concerning improper
conduct involving members and current and former pages".[124]

On December 8, 2006, the committee reported the investigation's conclusion,
finding Hastert and other Republican leaders negligent, but not in violation
of any House rules. The panel did not recommend any sanctions for their
failure to stop Foley. The investigation validated Trandahl's and Fordham's
reports and concluded that Hastert's chief of staff first learned of Foley's
conduct in 2002 or 2003, and that Hastert's chief counsel had been aware of
concerns for nearly a decade.[125]

### [edit] Justice Department

On October 13, 2006, a Justice Department spokesman confirmed that they had
opened a preliminary investigation of the official rafting trip taken in 1996
by Kolbe with two 17-year-old former pages.[10]

On October 1, 2006 in a letter to U.S. Attorney General Alberto Gonzales,
Hastert requested an investigation into Foley's actions, specifically into the
explicit IMs that had recently surfaced. Hastert's letter also requested
investigation of persons who knew or had possession of these messages but did
not report them to the appropriate authorities. That day, the FBI stated that
it was assessing whether any federal laws had been violated.[126]

The Justice Department sent a letter on October 4 to the counsel for the House
of Representatives, ordering the body to "preserve all records" that might
relate to the scandal. An order such as this is usually soon followed with
search warrants and subpoenas.[127]

On July 21, 2006, the director of the organization Citizens for Responsibility
and Ethics in Washington (CREW) received copies of the e-mails from one of her
staff members, who had received it two days earlier.[22] On that day, CREW
turned over the e-mails to the FBI; however, the FBI found insufficient
grounds to open a criminal investigation.[46] After the scandal broke, CREW
criticized the FBI's lack of action.[22] An anonymous source in the FBI told
the Washington Post that CREW was their original source for the e-mails but
had provided only heavily redacted copies, even after a request for complete
copies, and would not identify their source. The FBI source also alleged that
CREW had held the emails since April before turning them over. However, the
department spokesman would not comment on the record. CREW's executive
director, Melanie Sloan, replied that they had provided unedited e-mails to
the FBI, and that her original e-mails to the FBI proved that. She formally
requested that the Justice Department's Inspector General investigate the
FBI's assertions.[128]

The resulting Inspector General's report concluded that 1) CREW had received
the emails in July and turned them over to the FBI within two days; 2) the
FBI's decision not to pursue charges against Foley based on the initial emails
did not constitute misconduct; but 3) the FBI probably should have referred
the case to the House Page Board or other authorities based on what they
received.[129]

## [edit] Responses

Mark Foley's actions were almost universally condemned. The actions and
inactions of Hastert and other members of the Republican House leadership were
widely condemned by Democrats and some Republicans. On September 29, 2006,
Rep. Pelosi (D-CA) criticized Republican leaders, who, she said, "have known
of the egregious behavior of Congressman Mark Foley, yet were prepared to
adjourn [Congress] tonight without an Ethics Committee investigation." DCCC
Chairman Rahm Emanuel noted that Alexander had first gone to Reynolds, who was
in charge of political operations, and said, "That's to protect a member [of
Congress], not to protect a child." When Foley's sexually explicit instant
messages became public, a few members of the Republican Party condemned his
actions. They voted unanimously with House Democrats to refer the matter to
the House Ethics Committee for investigation. Speaker of the House Dennis
Hastert also demanded a criminal investigation by writing the Attorney General
asking for a full investigation both into Foley's actions and into the
possibility that earlier clues were not properly acted upon by Congressional
officials, representatives, the media, and the FBI.[130]

Some members of the gay community voiced concerns over media coverage of the
Mark Foley scandal, since the scandal linked homosexuality and pederasty,[131]
while others condemn the media's complicity in permitting Foley to remain
closeted.[132] Many Republican candidates have announced that they are either
returning contributions from Foley's campaign or contributing any Foley money
received in the last several years to charity. The NRCC, however, has opted to
keep a $100,000 contribution made to it by Foley in July 2006, after the
first, "overly friendly" e-mails had become known to House Republican
leaders.[133] Carl Forti, an NRCC spokesman, has said the campaign
organization would gladly accept the $2.7 million campaign war chest that
Foley controlled upon his resignation, should Foley choose to turn it over.
[134] On October 5, 2006, the parents of the former page from Louisiana, who
initially complained about the e-mails to Rep. Alexander, issued a public
statement. They described their son's actions as courageous, and described him
as a hero for reporting the emails. They supported Alexander, calling his
conduct "beyond reproach". They complained about media harassment, and asked
to be left alone, requesting respect for their privacy.[135]

## [edit] Political impact

### [edit] Post-scandal polls and commentary

A Time poll reported that two-thirds of those aware of the scandal believe
that the Republican leadership in Congress attempted a cover-up.[136]
According to FOX News, an internal Republican poll conducted in the wake of
the scandal shows potentially disastrous election results for Congressional
Republicans if Hastert remains as Speaker of the House.[137] The unnamed
Republican source is quoted as saying "The data suggests Americans have bailed
on the speaker, and the difference could be between a 20-seat loss and 50-seat
loss." For Democrats to regain control of the House, they had to post a net
gain of 15 seats in the 2006 midterm elections.

The National Review, a conservative magazine, called the scandal helpful for
Democrats campaigning to regain control of one or both houses of Congress, and
said it could have a greater impact than the Jack Abramoff scandals since "a
GOP pederasty scandal" is thought to resonate more strongly with the public
than one involving the purchase of favors.[138]

On October 3, the Washington Times called for Hastert's resignation as Speaker
over his handling of the scandal.[107] Other prominent conservatives have
called for Hastert's resignation, such as David Bossie, president of Citizens
United; conservative columnist Richard Viguerie; and conservative columnist
Michael Reagan, a son of former President Ronald Reagan.[139]

A Pew Research Center poll released on October 5 indicated no significant
change in registered voters' party support; before and after the scandal
broke, Democrats had 51 percent support in the upcoming congressional
elections, while Republicans had 38 percent support.[140] In later polls,
however, Republicans hemorrhaged support; a USA Today/Gallup survey published
October 10 showed Democrats enjoying a 23-point advantage over Republicans,
with an 11-point gain for Democrats, and a 12-point loss for Republicans,
since a poll released on September 17.[141]

A October 5, 2006 public opinion poll found that 27% of American thought
Hastert should remain Speaker, with 43% thinking he should resign from
Congress entirely.[142]

On October 6, political scientist and analyst Stuart Rothenberg wrote that the
scandal may have helped to "set the stage for a blowout of cosmic proportions
next month" in the November elections.[143] University of Virginia political
scientist Larry Sabato, on October 5, wrote that "the congressional page
scandal [had] joined leaked reports of poor progress in Iraq and Bob
Woodward's portrayal of the President Bush as a clueless war wager to deliver
Bush and Republicans their worst, most catastrophic week of 2006."[144]

### [edit] Effect in Foley's district

In Florida, State Representative Joe Negron was picked to fill Foley's spot in
the November elections. The Democratic nominee for the seat was Tim Mahoney.
Florida law prohibited Foley's name from being removed from the ballot at the
time of his withdrawal from the race, but Republicans hoped that voters would
recognize that a vote for Foley would transfer to Negron as a substitute
candidate.[145] Nevertheless, Boehner noted that because of the procedures in
Florida, "to vote for this candidate, you have to vote for Mark Foley. How
many people are going to hold their nose to do that?"[146] Negron used the
slogan, "Punch Foley for Joe," having the double meaning of officially voting
for Foley in order to really elect Negron as well as evoking images of
physically striking the offending member of Congress. Foley's Republican-held
seat was regarded as unlikely to change hands before the scandal broke, but
CQPolitics changed its rating of the race from Safe Republican â where it
had stood since July â to Leans Democratic in early-October.[147] On
Election Day, Mahoney won the seat.

### [edit] Effect in Reynolds's district

Reynolds, the head of the NRCC, who knew of some Foley e-mails before the
scandal became public, released an ad apologizing to his constituents.[148] He
was thought to have a safe seat. Shortly before the scandal broke, a SurveyUSA
poll found Reynolds' Democratic challenger Jack Davis unexpectedly trailing by
only two percentage points (43%-45%),[4] a statistical tie. A subsequent
SurveyUSA poll taken a week after the first poll show Davis now leading
50-45,[5] outside of either poll's margin of error. A Zogby telephone poll
conducted on October 4-5, after the scandal had been in the news for a week,
found Reynolds trailing 33-48.[6] Nevertheless, Reynolds won the race.

### [edit] Effect on other congressional races

Within a week of the scandal breaking, five candidates ran campaign ads in
reaction to the scandal. Democratic House candidates Patty Wetterling in
Minnesota's 6th District, Mary Jo Kilroy in Ohio's 15th, Maxine Moul in
Nebraska's 1st district, and Baron Hill in Indiana's 9th came out with ads
connecting their opponents to the Republican leadership and, by association,
Mark Foley.[149]

## [edit] Page program

On October 2, 2006, Representative Ray LaHood (R-IL) called for the page
program to be temporarily suspended. He stated that "this is a flawed program.
The fact that a member of Congress is sending e-mails to a page and that he
can get away with it (shows that) obviously there are problems." Two more
Representatives, Jon Porter (R-NV) and Kay Granger (R-TX) also supported
LaHood's recommendation to suspend the page program until an outside team
could evaluate its security protocol. Hastert announced on October 5, 2006
that he was launching an investigation to evaluate and make improvements to
the page program.[150]

## [edit] Legal issues

Foley, as chair of the House Caucus on Missing and Exploited Children, is an
expert on law concerning sex with minors. His pursuit of young former pages,
in many cases, carefully avoided illegality.[151][152]

### [edit] Age of consent

In the United States, 18 years of age is the age of majority (anyone below
that age is considered a minor). However, the age of consent for sexual
relations can differ from the age of majority, being dictated by statutory
rape laws, and varies by state (it is 16 in the District of Columbia).[153]

The email that first came to light was sent to a 16-year-old former page in
Louisiana, where the age of consent is 17.[154] However, the age of consent is
relevant only in cases where there has been physical, sexual contact.[155]
Foley has not been accused of any such contact with this youth, and has
specifically denied sexual contact with any minor through his lawyer.[48] On
another occasion he offered a narrower denial of "inappropriate sexual contact
with a minor".[156]

The minimum age for House pages is 16.[157] Two former pages have told news
organizations that Foley arranged sexual liaisons with them but only after
they turned 18 and 21 respectively.[16][17] On October 19, anonymous law
enforcement sources said that FBI interviews with at least 40 former pages
involved in the case had not found evidence of sex crimes violations by Mark
Foley.[88] The FBI identified a pattern where Foley began courting the pages
at age 16 or 17 but waited until they turned 18 to have sex.

In the state of Florida the age of consent on the internet is 21. If Foley
broke the law in Florida, and is convicted, he would be a sex offender,
although the Constitutionality of such a law is probably in dispute in light
of issues dealing with interstate commerce and the challenge in having one age
of consent law for sex and another one for the Internet. Yet, no formal
charges have been filed against him, as of Fall 2007[152]

### [edit] Sexual communications with minors

Legislation that Mark Foley helped enact, the Adam Walsh Child Protection and
Safety Act, covers certain Internet communications with children under 18.
Federal law makes it a crime to solicit sex with a child below the age of
consent. However, federal law does not prohibit an individual from engaging in
explicit, sexual communications with a minor per se.[155]

Some state laws criminalize certain communications with minors, even in the
absence of physical sexual contact. In Florida, which Foley represented in
Congress, the age of consent is 18 and attempts to seduce a minor are illegal.
Louisiana makes it a felony to have sexually explicit communications over the
Internet with anyone under 17. California has a law against sending sexually
suggestive communications to anyone under 18.[154]

The initially publicized explicit IMs were made with two pages or former pages
beginning when they were 16 or 17, and continuing until after their 18th
birthdays.[3][158] One of the pages told the FBI that his contacts with Foley
led to two meetings, including a dinner in San Diego in October 2002, when the
page was 17. After dinner, the page said, Foley invited him back to his hotel
room and "touched his leg," but nothing untoward happened beyond that in a 20
minute visit.[39]

### [edit] Alcohol use

In one instant message conversation, Foley appears to invite a minor to his
house to consume alcohol.[3] It is unknown if this ever happened, but it is a
crime to provide alcohol to a person under the legal drinking age. In the
District of Columbia, the law states that "anyone who purchases or furnishes
alcohol to a [person below the drinking age] faces a fine of up to $1,000
and/or imprisonment for up to 180 days."[159] In addition, an individual under
the age of 21 is prohibited in the District of Columbia from consuming
alcoholic beverages.[160]

## [edit] See also

  * United States House election, 2006
  * Reaction formation
  * 1983 Congressional page sex scandal

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "News Release - Denied Access to Critical Data, FDLE Concludes Investigation into Former Congressman Mark Foley". Florida Department of LAW Enforcement. September 19, 2008. http://www.fdle.state.fl.us/Press_Releases/20080919_Former_Congressman.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-13.
  2. ^ "Istook Aide may be victim in page scandal". NewsOk.com. October 5, 2006. http://www.newsok.com/article/keyword/2951137/. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  3. ^ a b c d "New Foley Instant Messages; Had Internet Sex While Awaiting House Vote". ABC News. 2006-10-03. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/10/new_foley_insta.html.
  4. ^ a b "Shimkus approached Foley about early e-mails". St. Louis Post Dispatch. 2006-09-30. http://www.stltoday.com/stltoday/news/stories.nsf/stlouiscitycounty/story/3CF7F67D826703DA862571F9006E2C2F?OpenDocument. Retrieved on 2006-10-03.
  5. ^ "Suggestive emails, Congressman in rehab". 14WFIE. October 5, 2006. http://www.14wfie.com/Global/story.asp?S=5484336&nav=3w6o. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  6. ^ "House needs to clean up mess". Chicago Tribune. October 2, 2006. http://newsblogs.chicagotribune.com/news_theswamp/2006/10/house_has_to_cl.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  7. ^ "Scandal May Further Alienate Republican Base". Wall Street Journal. October 3, 2006. http://online.wsj.com/public/article/SB115979419705279905-iw_BVeCM48F6lGTleSYRB_CxBuU_20061101.html?mod=tff_main_tff_top. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  8. ^ "Foley's Behavior No Secret on Capitol Hill". ABC News. October 1, 2006. http://www.abcnews.go.com/WNT/story?id=2514770&page=1. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  9. ^ a b c "Kolbe Matter Is Referred to House Ethics Panel: Allegations Involve Contact With Male Former Pages". 2006-10-18. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/17/AR2006101700139.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-18.
  10. ^ a b c "Feds probe trip that Kolbe made with pages: Congressman alleged to have been inappropriate on '96". NBC News Investigative Unit. 2006-10-13. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/15249733/. Retrieved on 2006-10-13.
  11. ^ a b "We told you so...10 years ago". The Advocate.com. 2006-10-10. http://www.advocate.com/exclusive_detail_ektid37249.asp. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  12. ^ a b "Some Say They Felt Uneasy About Representative's Attention". Washington Post. 2006-10-04. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/03/AR2006100301633.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  13. ^ a b c "Ex-Page Says He Got Messages From Foley". San Francisco Chronicle. October 5, 2006. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/n/a/2006/10/05/national/w071357D24.DTL.
  14. ^ "Florida won't charge ex-lawmaker in sex scandal". Reuters. 2008-09-19. http://www.reuters.com/article/domesticNews/idUSN1928520120080919. Retrieved on 2008-10-01.
  15. ^ a b "Hastert Aides Interest Ethics Panel: Staff Members' Knowledge of Foley's Actions With Former Pages in Question". Washington Post. 2006-10-12. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/11/AR2006101101639.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  16. ^ a b c d e f "Three More Former Pages Accuse Foley of Online Sexual Approaches". ABC News. October 5, 2006. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/10/three_more_form.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  17. ^ a b c d e f g Roche, Jr., Walter F. (October 8, 2006). "Ex-Page Tells of Foley Liaison". Los Angeles Times. http://www.latimes.com/news/nationworld/nation/la-na-page8oct08,0,3896853.story?coll=la-home-headlines.
  18. ^ "Louisiana congressman's aide to testify about Foley e-mails". KTBS.com (KTBS 3 Television Station). October 16, 2006. http://www.ktbs.com/news/local/4411041.html. Retrieved on 2006-11-27.
  19. ^ a b c "History of Foley Messages' Release Clarified by Players: 2 Sources Explain Motives, Citing Concern for Hill's Pages". Washington Post. 2006-10-11. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/10/AR2006101001379.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-11.
  20. ^ "Emails from congressman Foley to 16 year old page". Stopsexpredators. 2006-09-24. http://stopsexpredators.blogspot.com/2006/09/emails-from-congressman-foley-to-16.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  21. ^ a b c Espo, David; Jim Kuhnhenn (2006-09-29). "Foley Resigns From Congress Over E-Mails". Houston Chronicle. http://www.chron.com/disp/story.mpl/ap/politics/4225891.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-29.
  22. ^ a b c Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (2006-10-02). CREW urges DOJ I.G. to probe why FBI failed to investigate Foley's emails sent by CREW this summer. Press release. http://www.citizensforethics.org/press/newsrelease.php?view=163. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  23. ^ "Text of the initial emails" (PDF). Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington. http://www.citizensforethics.org/filelibrary/FoleyEmailExchangeUpdated.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-10-04.
  24. ^ "Ex-page says he saw suggestive e-mails". The Chicago Tribune. 2006-02-20. http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/nationworld/chi-0610020156oct02,1,1659039.story. Retrieved on 2006-10-11.
  25. ^ "The Sexually Explicit Internet Messages That Led to Fla. Rep. Foley's Resignation". The Blotter, ABC News. 2006-09-29. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/09/exclusive_the_s.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-01.
  26. ^ Ross, Brian; Sauer, Maddy (2006-09-29). "Foley To Resign Over Sexually Explicit Messages to Minors". ABC News The Blotter. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/09/foley_resigns_o.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-29.
  27. ^ "Lawmaker Saw Foley Messages In 2000: Page Notified GOP Rep. Kolbe". Washington Post. 2006-10-08. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/08/AR2006100800855.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  28. ^ a b "Foley Cruising in His BMW; Another Dorm Visit in 2000". ABC.com. 2006-10-11. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/10/foley_cruising_.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-11.
  29. ^ "Foley Story Wasn't Reported, Until It Was". National Public Radio. 2006-06-20. http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=6211216. Retrieved on 2006-10-07.
  30. ^ "Leader of U.S. House defends handling of scandal involving congressman, young former page". International Herald Tribune. 2006-10-03. http://www.iht.com/articles/ap/2006/10/03/america/NA_GEN_US_Congressman_Resigns.php. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  31. ^ a b "Papers Knew of Foley E-Mail but Did Not Publish Stories". New York Times. 2006-10-03. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/03/washington/03media.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-03.
  32. ^ a b "A Secret Life: Mark Foley's explicit e-mails could bring down the GOP.". Newsweek Magazine. October 16, 2006 issue. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/15178112/site/newsweek/page/4/. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  33. ^ "A Note from the Editors". The Buzz (St. Petersburg Times). 2006-09-30. http://blogs.tampabay.com/buzz/2006/09/a_note_from_the.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-02.
  34. ^ "Republicans Want to Turn Over a New Page". Harper's Magazine. 2006-10-10. http://www.harpers.org/sb-republicans-1160492797.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-11.
  35. ^ "Longtime Republican was source of e-mails". The Hill. 2006-10-05. http://www.hillnews.com/thehill/export/TheHill/News/Frontpage/100506/news2.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  36. ^ a b c d "Sixteen-Year-Old Who Worked as Capitol Hill Page Concerned About E-mail Exchange with Congressman". The Blotter, ABC News. September 28, 2006. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/09/sixteenyearold_.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  37. ^ David Kirkpatrick (2006-10-26). "Rights Group Fires Publisher of Foley E-Mail". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/26/us/politics/26foley.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-26.
  38. ^ Underaged Gay Sex Scandal!, Wonkette, September 27, 2006
  39. ^ a b "Hastert Vows to Fire Aides if a Cover-Up Is Discovered". The New York Times. 2006-10-11. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/11/washington/11foley.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-11.
  40. ^ a b "Foley Saga No Shock to Some". Los Angeles Times. 2006-10-03. http://www.latimes.com/news/nationworld/nation/la-na-foley3oct03,1,3384120.story?track=crosspromo&coll=la-headlines-nation&ctrack=1&cset=true. Retrieved on 2006-10-03.
  41. ^ "Foley Resigns Over Sexually Explicit Messages to Minors". ABC News. 2006-09-29. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/09/exclusive_the_s.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-10.
  42. ^ Ferrechio, Susan (September 29, 2006). "Republican Rep. Foley Resigns, Drops Re-election Bid in Fla. 16". St. Petersburg Times. http://news.yahoo.com/s/cq/20060929/pl_cq_politics/republicanrepfoleyresignsdropsreelectionbidinfla16_1. Retrieved on 2006-09-18.
  43. ^ "Onetime Loyal Aide Now Stands to Undermine GOP". Los Angeles Times. 2006-10-07. http://www.latimes.com/news/politics/la-na-fordham5oct05,1,7047028.story. Retrieved on 2006-10-07.
  44. ^ a b "How Foley Scandal Could Cost Bush Congress". Newsweek. October 9, 2006. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/15178112/site/newsweek.
  45. ^ "Florida GOP Names Replacement Candidate". San Francisco Chronicle. October 2, 2006. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/n/a/2006/10/02/national/a150628D11.DTL&type=politics. Retrieved on 2006-10-03.
  46. ^ a b "Pressure Grows for G.O.P. Over Foley Scandal". New York Times. 2006-10-03. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/03/us/03foley.html?ex=1317528000&en=facfda09162eea42&ei=5090&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss. Retrieved on 2006-10-03.
  47. ^ "Foley Says He Was Abused by a Clergyman". ABC News. 2006-10-03. http://www.abcnews.go.com/Politics/wireStory?id=2523829. Retrieved on 2006-10-03.
  48. ^ a b "Statement by Mark Foley's attorney, David Roth" (PDF). ABC TV News. 2006-10-05. http://abcnews.go.com/images/WNT/ross_roth_statement_foley.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  49. ^ "Mark Foley Claims Being Molested As Teen". Washington Post. 2006-10-04. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/04/AR2006100400230.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  50. ^ "Mysterious blog scooped media on Foley messages". CNN. 2006-10-05. http://www.cnn.com/2006/POLITICS/10/04/foley.internet/index.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  51. ^ "Being gay in the GOP". Boston Phoenix. May 30, 2005. http://www.bostonphoenix.com/boston/news_features/editorial/documents/02919063.htm. Retrieved on 2005-10-05.
  52. ^ Kathleen Chapman (October 11, 2006). "Catholic Church asks Foley to name alleged molester". Palm Beach Post. http://www.palmbeachpost.com/localnews/content/local_news/epaper/2006/10/11/1011foley_letter.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-11.
  53. ^ Alan Cooperman (2006-10-06). "Diocese, Victim's Groups Demand Foley Reveal Alleged Abuser". Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/06/AR2006100600937.html.
  54. ^ Kurtz, Howard (October 20, 2006). "Hillary, Johnny Mac and Mo". The Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/blog/2006/10/20/BL2006102000309_pf.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-22.
  55. ^ a b MATTHEW DOIG and MAURICE TAMMAN (2006-10-19). "Priest tells of Foley relationship: Then-altar boy may have found some things inappropriate". Sarasota Herald Tribune. http://www.heraldtribune.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20061019/NEWS/610190725. Retrieved on 2006-10-19.
  56. ^ Howard Schneider and Debbi Wilgoren (2006-10-19). "Priest Acknowledges Intimate Contact With Foley". Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/19/AR2006101900533.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-19.
  57. ^ a b "Miami Archdiocese apologizes to Foley". Cable News Network. 2006-10-20. http://www.cnn.com/2006/POLITICS/10/20/foley.priest/index.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-20.
  58. ^ "Priest Details Relationship With Foley: Catholic Priest Admits To Sitting In Saunas, Giving Massages To Ex-Congressman; Wonders Why He's Upset". CBS Broadcasting Inc. 2006-10-19. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2006/10/19/national/main2109801.shtml. Retrieved on 2006-10-20.
  59. ^ Goodnough, Abby (October 20, 2006). "Priest Says He Had Close Contact With Foley". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/20/washington/20priest.html?hp&ex=1161316800&en=20b8c86acbe139cf&ei=5094&partner=homepage.
  60. ^ Samantha Zee, on Bloomberg.com; Priest Who Fondled Foley Faces New Accusation [1]
  61. ^ Kay, Jennifer (July 18, 2007). "Settlement in Abuse Case of Foley Priest". AP. http://www.forbes.com/feeds/ap/2007/07/18/ap3928431.html.
  62. ^ "Feds investigate Kolbe's '96 camping trip with pages". The Arizona Republic. 2006-10-13. http://www.azcentral.com/news/articles/1013congress-kolbe13-ON.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-14.
  63. ^ a b c "Investigation of page scandal widens". Houston Chronicle (from AP). 2006-10-17. http://www.chron.com/disp/story.mpl/headline/nation/4264316.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-17.
  64. ^ Rhonda Schwartz and John Yang (2006-10-25). "Trandahl Names Kolbe as a 'Problem' With Page Program, Source Says". ABC News The Blotter. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/10/trandahl_names_.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-25.
  65. ^ Edward Felker (2006-10-20). "Weller refers incident to House". Kankakee Daily Journal. http://daily-journal.com/archives/dj/display.php?id=380821. Retrieved on 2006-10-20.
  66. ^ "Why isn't the Ken Mehlman lie a bigger story?". Unclaimed Territory. 2006-10-09. http://glenngreenwald.blogspot.com/2006/10/why-isnt-ken-mehlman-lie-bigger-story.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  67. ^ "Kellyâs Connections to Foley Scandal Put Her Seat at Risk". New York Times. October 9, 2006. http://www.nytimes.com/cq/2006/10/09/cq_1598.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  68. ^ "In The Loop: Chemical Reactions". Washington Post. 2005-11-18. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/11/17/AR2005111701764.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  69. ^ "Congressional Record Daily Digest". US Government General Printing Office. 2005-11-18. http://www.gpoaccess.gov/crecord/digest2005/d18NO051.txt. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  70. ^ a b c Weisman, Jonathan (October 7, 2006). "Staffer backs up alleged 2003 Foley face-off". The Washington Post. http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/politics/2003293173_foley07.html.
  71. ^ "Hastert, Top Aides Knew of Foley Allegations". Roll Call Magazine. September 30, 2006. http://rollcall.com/issues/1_1/breakingnews/15263-1.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  72. ^ Wolf, Z. Byron (2006-10-16). "Staffers Testify On Foley E-mails". ABC News. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/10/staffers_testif.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-16.
  73. ^ a b Weisman, Jonathan (October 9, 2006). "Lawmaker Saw Foley Messages In 2000". The Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/08/AR2006100800855.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-09.
  74. ^ a b "Kolbe Clarifies Handling of Foley Complaint". ABC News. October 10, 2006. http://blogs.abcnews.com/politicalradar/2006/10/kolbe_clarifies_1.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-10.
  75. ^ "House ethics panel questions officials closest to the pages". USA Today. 2006-10-12. http://www.usatoday.com/news/washington/2006-10-11-foley-ethics-panel_x.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  76. ^ "Democratic Leadership Knew About Foley E-mails". ABC News. 2006-12-08. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/12/democratic_lead.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-08.
  77. ^ "Hardball With Chris Matthews". MSNBC. 2006-10-06. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/15128915/. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  78. ^ a b Schecter, Anna (2006-10-01). "GOP Staff Warned Pages About Foley in 2001". ABC News. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/10/gop_staff_warne.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-01.
  79. ^ Grimaldi, Christine (2006-10-02). "Page disputes warning about Rep. Foley". Palm Beach Post. http://www.palmbeachpost.com/state/content/state/epaper/2006/10/02/1002page.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-02.
  80. ^ "A Secret Life: Mark Foley's explicit e-mails could bring down the GOP.". Newsweek Magazine. 2006-10-16 issue. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/15178112/site/newsweek/. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  81. ^ "Washington Post: Foley's Former Top Aide Testifies". Washington Post. October 13, 2006. p. Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/12/AR2006101200561.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-14.
  82. ^ "The Blotter:Exclusive: Former House Clerk's Testimony". ABC News. 2006-10-19. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/10/house_clerks_te.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-19.
  83. ^ [Ex-House Clerk Testifies to Panel in Foley Case "Ex-House Clerk Testifies to Panel in Foley Case"]. New York Times. 2006-10-19. Ex-House Clerk Testifies to Panel in Foley Case. Retrieved on 2006-10-19.
  84. ^ a b c d e "Internal Review of Contacts With the Office of the Speaker Regarding the Congressman Mark Foley Matter". Office of Speaker Hastert. 2006-09-30. http://releases.usnewswire.com/GetRelease.asp?id=73543.
  85. ^ a b "Panel Questions Ex-Aide to Foley". New York Times (from AP). 2006-10-12. http://www.nytimes.com/aponline/us/AP-Congress-Pages.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  86. ^ "Candidate alleges Foley case cover-up". Bellville News-Democrat. 2006-10-01. http://www.belleville.com/mld/belleville/15653543.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-01.
  87. ^ "G.O.P. Aides Knew in Late â05 of E-Mail". New York Times. October 1, 2006. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/01/washington/01foley.html?ex=1317355200&en=3cc73da1de57ef98&ei=5090&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss. Retrieved on 2006-10-01.
  88. ^ a b "Louisiana Page Not Central to Inquiry, Lawmaker Says". New York Times. 2006-10-18. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/19/washington/19foley.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-19.
  89. ^ a b c Babington, Charles and Jonathan Weisman (2006-09-30). "Rep. Foley Quits In Page Scandal: Explicit Online Notes Sent to Boy, 16". Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/09/29/AR2006092901574.html.
  90. ^ a b c "GOP Leader Rebuts Hastert on Foley". Washington Post. October 1, 2006. p. A01. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/09/30/AR2006093001265_pf.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-04.
  91. ^ Wehrman, Jessica (2006-10-03). "Boehner discusses Foley e-mails". Dayton Daily News (Cox Enterprises): p. A13. http://nl.newsbank.com/nl-search/we/Archives?p_docid=11497B8C1F6EC890. Retrieved on 2006-10-04.
  92. ^ "Democrat Alludes to Other Page Cases". ABC News. 2006-10-17. http://www.abcnews.go.com/Politics/wireStory?id=2577146. Retrieved on 2006-10-17.
  93. ^ "Sweet Column: Scandal splits Hastert, Shimkus". Chicago Sun-Times. 2006-10-10. http://blogs.suntimes.com/sweet/2006/10/sweet_column_scandal_splits_ha.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-13.
  94. ^ "Michigan Dem who oversees pages was kept in the dark". The Detroit News. 2006-10-02. http://www.detnews.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20061002/POLITICS/610020338/1022. Retrieved on 2006-10-02.
  95. ^ "Capito says she was not told about congressman's e-mails". Charleston Daily Mail. October 2, 2006. http://www.dailymail.com/story/News/+/200610027/Capito+says+she+was+not+told+about+congressman's+e-mails/. Retrieved on 2006-10-02.
  96. ^ "Hastert Aides Interest Ethics Panel: Staff Members' Knowledge of Foley's Actions With Former Pages in Question". Washington Post. 2006-10-12. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/11/AR2006101101639.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  97. ^ "House interviews page supervisors". Washington Times (from AP). 2006-10-12. http://www.washingtontimes.com/national/20061011-113051-7137r.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  98. ^ "Rep. Foley Quits In Page Scandal". The Washington Post. 2006-09-30. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/09/29/AR2006092901574.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-20.
  99. ^ a b "Hastert Accepts Responsibility for Foley Scandal, Won't Resign". Bloomberg News Service. October 5, 2006. http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601087&sid=aVvX0Y0Z8ZUo&refer=home. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  100. ^ Associated Press (2006-10-19). "Boehner Testifies in Page Scandal Probe". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/aponline/us/AP-Congress-Pages.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-19.
  101. ^ "Foley Interviewed About Page Last Year; Democrats Not Told". Roll Call. 2006-09-29. http://www.rollcall.com/issues/1_1/breakingnews/15259-1.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-30.
  102. ^ The Blotter: Foley's Former Chief of Staff Says Foley's Behavior Was No Secret to Speaker Hastert
  103. ^ Hook, Janet; Noam N. Levey; Peter Wallsten (October 5, 2006). "Hastert Challenged About Office's Knowledge of Foley". The Los Angeles Times. http://www.latimes.com/news/printedition/front/la-na-foley5oct05,1,1539922.story. Retrieved on 2006-10-16.
  104. ^ http://www.speaker.gov/library/misc/061002Comments.shtml
  105. ^ "FBI examining Foley's e-mail to teens". Associated Press. 2006-10-02. http://news.yahoo.com/s/ap/20061002/ap_on_go_co/congressman_e_mails. Retrieved on 2006-10-02.
  106. ^ Media Matters, "Debunking the Foley myth machine"[2]
  107. ^ a b "Resign, Mr. Speaker". Washington Times. 2006-10-03. http://www.washtimes.com/op-ed/20061002-102008-9058r.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-10.
  108. ^ Lynch, Dotty (2006-10-04). "Can This Marriage Be Saved?". CBS News. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2006/10/04/opinion/lynch/main2059770.shtml. Retrieved on 2006-10-10.
  109. ^ Candiotti, Susan (2006-10-03). "Hastert ignores call to resign amid Foley fallout". CNN International. http://edition.cnn.com/2006/POLITICS/10/03/foley.scandal/. Retrieved on 2006-10-03. Taylor, Andrew (2006-10-03). "Hastert Stands by Handling of Foley Case". Associated Press. http://apnews.myway.com/article/20061003/D8KH5RN80.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-03.
  110. ^ "Hastert, GOP stand together amid Foley scandal". CNN. 2006-10-03. http://www.cnn.com/2006/POLITICS/10/03/hastert.foley/index.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-10.
  111. ^ "Bush Backs Hastert Investigation of Foley Online Messages With Male Page". FOX News. 2006-10-04. http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,217320,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  112. ^ "Sick New Foley Emails". New York Post. 2006-10-04. http://www.nypost.com/seven/10042006/news/nationalnews/sick_new_foley_e_mails_nationalnews_niles_lathem__post_correspondent.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-06.
  113. ^ Reynolds Knew, But Gave?, The Daily Politics, Ben Smith, NY Daily News, September 30, 2006
  114. ^ Top GOP Staffer Forced Out for Role in Page Scandal, The Blotter
  115. ^ Aide says he reported Foley 2 years ago
  116. ^ "Hastert Was Warned About Foley Two Years Ago, GOP Aide Says". ABC News. 2006-10-04. http://abcnews.go.com/US/story?id=2527764&page=1. Retrieved on 2006-10-04.
  117. ^ "Early Warning on Foley Cited by Former Aide". New York Times. 2006-10-05. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/05/washington/05hastert.html?ex=1317700800&en=7392e18bb0c89264&ei=5090&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss. Retrieved on 2006-10-06.
  118. ^ "How Rove twisted Foley's arm". The New Republic. 2006-10-12. http://www.tnr.com/blog/theplank?pid=47854. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  119. ^ "The Swamp: Top congressman defends Hastert". chicagotribune.com. 2006-10-03. http://newsblogs.chicagotribune.com/news_theswamp/2006/10/top_congressman.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  120. ^ "GOP House leaders call for criminal investigation of Foley". CNN. September 30, 2006. http://www.cnn.com/2006/POLITICS/09/30/foley.quits/index.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-02.
  121. ^ "Privileged resolution requiring investigation of knowledge of offenses of representative Mark Foley". Congressional Record. http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/C?r109:./temp/~r109cmXp8a.
  122. ^ "House Ethics Panel to Subpoena Documents". ABC News. http://www.abcnews.go.com/Politics/wireStory?id=2531925.
  123. ^ Margasak, Larry; David Espo (October 5, 2006). "House Opens Page Sex Scandal Inquiry". The Associated Press. http://www.abcnews.go.com/Politics/wireStory?id=2533106. Retrieved on 2006-10-06.
  124. ^ Babington, Charles (2006-10-06). "Inquiry To Look At House, Not Foley". Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/05/AR2006100500626_pf.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-06.
  125. ^ Zeleny, Jeff (2006-12-09). "Report Finds Negligence in Foley Case". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/12/09/washington/09foley.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-09.
  126. ^ Susan Davis, "Hastert Calls on Justice Department to Investigate Foley", Roll Call, October 1, 2006
  127. ^ Taylor, Andrew (2006-10-04). "Federal Probe Intensifies Over E-Mails". Associated Press. http://www.breitbart.com/news/2006/10/04/D8KHVLBG1.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-04.
  128. ^ "Watchdog Group Disputes FBI's Claims on E-Mails". Washington Post. 2006-10-06. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/05/AR2006100501657.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-07.
  129. ^ Eggen, Dan (2007-01-22). "FBI Faulted in Foley Investigation, Report Finds". Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/01/22/AR2007012200633.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-22.
  130. ^ "FBI looks at Foley's e-mails to teens". USA Today. 2006-10-02. http://www.usatoday.com/news/washington/2006-10-01-foley-gop_x.htm?POE=NEWISVA. Retrieved on 2006-10-02.
  131. ^ "Gay community reacts with ambivalence to Foley's coming out". Kansas City Star, reprinting South Florida Sun-Sentinel newspaper. 2006-10-03. http://www.kansascity.com/mld/kansascity/news/breaking_news/15671929.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  132. ^ MICHELANGELO SIGNORILE, "Outing the media for their role in the Foley scandal: Lawmaker's deceit about sexuality went unreported" in The Houston Chronicle[3]
  133. ^ "Candidates Give Foley Contributions Away". ABC News. 2006-10-02. http://www.abcnews.go.com/Politics/wireStory?id=2518675. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  134. ^ Hulse, Carl and Zeleny, Jeff (October 2, 2006). "Review of Messages Sent by Congressman Begins". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/02/washington/02foley.html?ex=1317441600&en=05964d30032a0385&ei=5090&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss.
  135. ^ "Page's family: Leave our 'hero' son alone". CNN. 2006-10-05. http://www.cnn.com/2006/POLITICS/10/05/page.statement/index.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  136. ^ "TIME Poll: The Foley Sex Scandal Has Hurt G.O.P. Election Prospects". TIME. October 5, 2006. http://www.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,1543199,00.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  137. ^ "Internal Poll Suggests Hastert Could Devastate GOP". FOX News. October 5, 2006. http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,218043,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-05.
  138. ^ "Foley Fallout". National Review. 2006-10-01. http://corner.nationalreview.com/post/?q=NTk4MzdjMTQ2OWFhY2I3OGUwZmU2NzY1MDhkODMyY2Q=. Retrieved on 2006-10-02.
  139. ^ "Hastert denies knowing about Foley IMs". Washington Times. 2006-10-02. http://www.washingtontimes.com/upi/20061002-043456-4895r.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-04.
  140. ^ ""Republicans fear election day scandal fallout"". Washingtonpost. 2006-10-05. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/05/AR2006100501126.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-06.
  141. ^ Lawrence, Jill (October 10, 2006). "Poll: Dems gain big lead". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/news/washington/2006-10-09-poll_x.htm.
  142. ^ "Public Opinion Poll" (html). Survey USA. 2006-10-05. http://www.surveyusa.com/client/PollReportPopup.aspx?g=fc8a6007-bbbb-4405-811e-ee99a1673e92&q=32258. Retrieved on 2006-10-06.
  143. ^ Rothenberg, Stuart (October 6, 2006). "A True Blowout Is Now Possible" (in English) (html). The Rothenberg Political Report. Real Clear Politics. http://www.realclearpolitics.com/articles/2006/10/a_true_blowout_is_now_possible.html. Retrieved on October 7 2006.
  144. ^ Sabato, Larry; David Wasserman (October 5, 2006). "OCTOBER SURPRISE! (And a Leadership Demise?)" (in English) (html). Sabato's Crystal Ball. The University of Virginia Center for Politics. http://www.centerforpolitics.org/crystalball/article.php?id=DNW2006100501. Retrieved on 2006-10-07.
  145. ^ "Report: Foley allegedly tried to meet page". CNN. 2006-10-02. http://www.cnn.com/2006/POLITICS/10/02/foley.quits/. Retrieved on 2006-10-02.
  146. ^ Dan Balz and Jim VandeHei (October 3, 2006). "After Foley, New Fears For the GOP: Some Say Party Could Lose House and Senate". Washington Post. p. A01. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/02/AR2006100201463.html.
  147. ^ Rachel Kapochunas, "Democrat Mahoney Has the Edge in Race for Seat Foley Vacated", CQPolitics.com, October 3, 2006
  148. ^ "Reynolds won't stump for Sherwood". The Hill Newsletter. 2006-10-11. http://www.thehill.com/thehill/export/TheHill/News/Frontpage/101106/sherwood.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  149. ^ "Hill ad tries to tie Sodrel to the Foley scandal". Indiana Courier-Journal. 2006-10-10. http://www.courier-journal.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20061010/NEWS02/61010002/1025. Retrieved on 2006-10-12.
  150. ^ "Time to Close the Book on Washington Pages?". Time Magazine. October 5, 2006. http://www.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,1542874,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  151. ^ "Lis On Law: Jumping through Legal Loopholes?". Fox News. 2006-10-17. http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,221740,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-17.
  152. ^ a b Brian Ross (2006-10-18). "The Blotter: FBI Yet to Find Evidence of Foley-Page Sexual Contact". ABC News. http://blogs.abcnews.com/theblotter/2006/10/fbi_yet_to_find.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-19.
  153. ^ "Worldwide Ages of Consent". Avert.org. 2006-10-08. http://www.avert.org/aofconsent.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  154. ^ a b "Foley Could Face State Charges". FoxNews.com. 2006-10-07. http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,218478,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-07.
  155. ^ a b "Explicit Net messages aren't a federal crime". Houston Chronicle/AP. 2006-10-05. http://www.chron.com/disp/story.mpl/nation/4237337.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  156. ^ "Pressure Grows for Republicans Over Foley Scandal". New York Times. 2006-10-02. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/03/us/03foley.html?_r=1&ei=5094&en=e2e0c2ba5b921fdf&hp=&ex=1159934400&partner=homepage&pagewanted=all&oref=slogin. Retrieved on 2006-10-10.
  157. ^ "Legal Case Against Foley Could Be Tricky to Build". Los Angeles Times. 2006-10-08. http://www.latimes.com/news/politics/la-na-legal5oct05,0,2690471.story. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  158. ^ "Istook aide to cooperate with inquiry". The Oklahoman Newspaper. 2006-10-06. http://www.newsok.com/article/2951710. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  159. ^ "Legal Consequences: Washington, DC". Lowe Family Foundation. http://www.lowefamily.org/communities/dc.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  160. ^ "Drunk Driving Prevention". District of Columbia Metropolitan Police Department. http://mpdc.dc.gov/mpdc/cwp/view,a,1240,q,547858,mpdcNav_GID,1552,mpdcNav,%7C.asp. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.

## [edit] External links

  * Text of some IM exchanges between Foley and page Provided by ABC News. (Warning: sexually explicit language, reader discretion is advised.)
  * Email complaint from 16-year-old page, sent to Congressman Rodney Alexander's office, August 30, 2005. Provided by Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington.
  * Statement of David Roth (Mark Foley's attorney), October 5, 2006 Provided by ABC News.
  * A Review of the Federal Bureau of Investigationâs Initial Response to Representative Mark Foleyâs E-mails to a Former Page by the Office of the Inspector General, January 2007
  * Foley scandal discussed on the Tavis Smiley show
  * How a Blogger Put Himself in the Middle Of Mark Foley Story
  * Vanity Fair article on the scandal (in the magazine's January 2007 issue)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Foley_scandal"

Categories: 2006 in the United States | Congressional scandals | LGBT history
in the United States | Political scandals in the United States | Political sex
scandals | Modern pederasty | People associated with e-mail controversies

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 09:39 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



