
# Apple TV

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Apple TV The Apple TVâ  
Apple TV on display pre-release at the Macworld 2007 conference  
Manufacturer Apple Inc.  
Type Digital media receiver  
Media 40 or 160 GB Internal Hard disk[1]  
Operating system Apple TV 2.3.1[2], based on Frontrow  
CPU Intel[1] 1.0 GHz "Crofton"[3]  
Memory 256 MB DDR2 SDRAM[4]  
Input Apple Remote, iPhone, iPod touch (via Remote)  
Connectivity IEEE 802.11b/g/n Wi-Fi  
HDMI Port  
Component Video/Audio  
USB 2.0[1]  
Dimensions 197x197x28 mm (7.7x7.7x1.1 in)[1]  
Apple TV is a digital media receiver device manufactured, marketed and sold by
Apple. It is a network device designed to play digital content originating
from the iTunes store, YouTube, Flickr, MobileMe or any Mac OS X or Windows
computer running iTunes onto an enhanced-definition or high-definition
widescreen television. Apple TV can function as either a home theater-
connected iPod device or a digital media receiver, depending on the needs of
the user. It was first announced at a special press event in San Francisco,
California on September 12, 2006, by Apple CEO Steve Jobs.

The devices started shipping on March 21, 2007.[5] This initial version
shipped with 40 GB of storage. A second version with a larger 160 GB hard disk
started shipping on May 31, 2007.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Features
    * 2.1 Connectivity
    * 2.2 Internet media services
    * 2.3 AirTunes
    * 2.4 Remote control
    * 2.5 Local network media
    * 2.6 Look and feel
    * 2.7 Content support
  * 3 Specifications
  * 4 Modifications and hacks
  * 5 Limitations
    * 5.1 Functionality
    * 5.2 Content
    * 5.3 Hardware
    * 5.4 Former limitations
  * 6 Sales
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] History

Apple TV was first announced at a special press event in San Francisco,
California on September 12, 2006, at which Apple CEO Steve Jobs also announced
enhanced fifth generation iPods, the addition of films to the iTunes Store and
the release of version 7 of iTunes. The final product name was not announced
at the event, but was instead referred to by its codename iTV.[6]

Jobs again previewed Apple TV during his January 9 keynote speech at the 2007
Macworld Expo, where he announced that Apple would begin taking pre-orders for
the device. Apple TV started shipping on March 21, 2007.[7]

A second version with a larger 160 GB hard disk started shipping on May 31,
2007. On January 15, 2008, Jobs announced a major software upgrade to the
Apple TV system (dubbed "Take Two") at the 2008 San Francisco Macworld Event.
The free update removed the requirement for another computer running the
iTunes software client to stream or load content to the device. The update
also added the ability to rent and purchase movies and music from the iTunes
Store directly from the device, as well as download podcasts and stream photos
live from MobileMe (.Mac at the time) and Flickr.

## [edit] Features

AppleTV is a network device that allows consumers to use an HDTV set to easily
view photos, play music and watch video that originates from an Internet media
service or a local network. Internet media services include the iTunes Store,
YouTube, Flickr, or MobileMe. By connecting directly to the iTunes Store,
users can buy and rent movies, buy television shows, songs, albums, and music
videos and subscribe to video and audio podcasts, much of the content in HD-
quality. Consumers can browse and view YouTube videos and Flickr or MobileMe
photo albums.[8] Apple TV can also sync or stream photo, music and video
content from a network-connected computer running iTunes. Apple TV includes
enhanced remote control and AirTunes capabilities.

Apple plans to continue offering new features through automatic software
upgrades, leaving the door open to further utilization of its hardware
capabilities and new software developments.[9]

#### [edit] Connectivity

Apple TV connects to a television or other video equipment through either
High-Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI) or component video connections.
The product does not come with any connecting cables in the box (other than an
AC power cable), so the user must supply either a HDMI cable or component
video/stereo audio cables.

Although Apple's website states that an enhanced-definition or high-definition
widescreen television is required, Apple confirmed to MacLife that the unit
does work with standard definition TVs with component video connectors,[10]
but the picture may be vertically stretched if the TV does not support
anamorphic widescreen[11] (a video encoding technique used to optimize the
vertical picture by aspect ratio). Audio is supported via a digital optical
port, analog (RCA connector) audio ports, and through the HDMI port.

The device connects directly to the Internet or other computers either through
an Ethernet connection, or wirelessly through the standard IEEE 802.11b, g,
and n wireless protocols. A USB port is also included on the device, but is
reserved for service and diagnostics. Network connectivity is not required,
although Apple TV benefits from Internet media services, software updates, and
content stored on the local network.[12]

#### [edit] Internet media services

Apple TV offers basic media services with movie previews and YouTube videos.
The Apple TV provides YouTube integration by receiving direct streams from
YouTube.[13][14] A YouTube account is not required to browse and view YouTube
videos, but it is good to configure for personalized options, such as viewing
favorites.[15] In early December, 2008, YouTube released HD video content,[16]
but it is not yet viewable on Apple TV.[17]

With the 'Take 2' software update announced by Steve Jobs at Macworld 2008,
Apple TV became capable of acting as a pure stand-alone device, no longer
requiring a computer running iTunes on Mac OS X or Windows to stream or sync
content to it. Jobs stated, "Apple TV was designed to be an accessory for
iTunes and your computer. It was not what people wanted. We learned what
people wanted was movies, movies, movies."[18] Users can access the iTunes
store directly through Apple TV to purchase movies, music, music videos, and
television shows.[19][20] Customers can also use Apple TV to rent regular or
HD-quality movies[21] Until mid-March, 2009, iTunes HD movies could only be
purchased from Apple TV.[22][23]

Consumers can browse and view podcasts from the iTunes store, saving podcasts
as favorites.TWiT's Leo Laporte notes that the podcast support in the Apple TV
puts podcasts on the same level as other media,[24] and this was substantiated
by the fact that the standard podcast subscription process no longer applies
with Apple TV. It is seen by some as changing podcasts to video on demand
services.[25]

Internet photos can be viewed from MobileMe and Flickr accounts.[15] Apple TV
will display the photos in a slide show, with automatic cross-dissolve
transitions. The Ken Burns effect can also be configured for transitions.[26]

Parental controls allow consumers to limit access to Internet media service
content. Internet media is split into 4 categories: "Internet Photos",
"YouTube", "Podcasts", and "Purchase and Rental ". Each of the 4 categories is
configured by a parental control of "Show", "Hide" or "Ask" to prompt for a
4-digit preset code. In addition, Movies and TV shows can be restricted based
on rating as well as explicit music and podcasts.[15]

#### [edit] AirTunes

AirTunes allows an Apple TV or AirPort-enabled computer with the iTunes music
player to send a stream of music to multiple (three to six, in typical
conditions) stereos connected to an AirPort Express or Apple TV.[27]

The AirPort Express' streaming media capabilities use Apple's Remote Audio
Output Protocol (RAOP), a proprietary variant of RTSP/RTP. Using WDS-
bridging,[28] the AirPort Express can allow AirTunes functionality (as well as
Internet access, file and print sharing, etc.) across a larger distance in a
mixed environment of wired and up to 10 wireless clients.

AirTunes can be controlled by a Keyspan USB-enabled infrared remote control
plugged into the USB port, but the Apple Remote's volume buttons cannot
control AirTunes. However volume control can be adjusted using the slider
within iTunes. AirTunes will not stream a video's audio.

Speakers attached to an AirPort Express can be selected from within the
"Remote" iPhone/iPod Touch program, allowing full AirTunes compatibility[29]
(see "Remote control" section below).

Several third-party AirPort Express clients can connect an AirPort Express to
sources other than iTunes, including Airfoil for Mac OS X, Windows, JustePort
for Windows, and raop-play for Linux.

#### [edit] Remote control

Apple TV comes with the standard Apple Remote,[30][31] Out of the box, the
default setting is unpaired which means any Apple Remote works with the
device. Apple TV can optionally be paired with one particular remote to
prevent conflicts from other IR-capable devices.[32] The remote control allows
for adjustment of playback volume, but for music only.[2][33][34]

Because the Apple Remote is a standard infrared remote, mainstream universal
remotes have been updated for use with Apple TV and can be used to control
volume.[35][36][34]The Apple TV can also has the ability to be programmed to
recognize commands from virtually any infrared remote control.[37]

On July 10, 2008, Apple released, in the App Store, Remote, a free application
that allows for a Wi-Fi-based remote control of the iTunes library on the
Apple TV and computers of the Mac line using Apple's line of devices with
iPhone OS 2.0 (currently the iPhone and iPod Touch).[38][39]

#### [edit] Local network media

Although access to computers on a local network is not required, typical
reasons for connectivity of Apple TV to a computer might be to maintain a
central home media library of legally-ripped CD, DVD or HD content,[40]
provide direct connectivity to photo organization software such as iPhoto,[41]
limit home video access to a local network only,[42] play Internet
radio,[43][44] or preload content on Apple TV to be used later as a non-
networked video player.[12] For users who wish to connect the Apple TV to a
computer, synchronization and streaming modes are supported.

In synchronization mode, Apple TV works in a similar way to the iPod. It is
paired with an iTunes library on a single computer and can then synchronize
with that library, copying content to its own hard drive. After syncing, Apple
TV is not required to remain connected to the network for the device to
continue functioning.[45] Sync modes include "automatic" for synchronizing all
iTunes content to the hard drive (in a specific priority), or "selected
content" to only synchronize specified content.[46] Photos can sync from
iPhoto, Aperture, or from a hard disk folder on a Mac, or Adobe Photoshop
Album, Photoshop Elements, or from a hard disk folder in Windows.[47]

However, syncing iTunes content to Apple TVs hard drive is not required, and
Apple TV can also function as a peer-to-peer digital media receiver, streaming
content from iTunes libraries and playing the content over the network.[30]
Streaming performance of movies and TV shows purchased from the iTunes Store
over an 802.11g wireless network was described by CNET's John P. Falcone as
"impressive".[35] Apple TV also includes the unapproved wireless-n
standard[48] for streaming 720p High-definition video (HD) content.[49] Photos
can stream from iPhoto or Aperture on a Mac, or Adobe Photoshop Album or
Photoshop Elements in Windows.[50]

Practical Technology comments that using the built-in streaming capabilities
of Apple TV negates the need for more storage[51] and Macworld's Christopher
Breen says the "cramped" space and slow synchronization on the 40 GB model
would be an issue if not for Apple TV's good streaming capabilities.[52]
Third-party functionality extends streaming beyond the home network to enable
streaming of Apple TV content across the Internet.[53]

Apple TV can stream content from up to five computers/iTunes libraries and
five Apple TVs can be linked to the same iTunes library. On a single network,
iLounge's Jeremy Horwitz tested "two Apple TVs with one computer, multiple
computers with one Apple TV, and multiple computers with multiple Apple TVs"
and all tests passed successfully. However Jeremy did note that syncing
multiple Apple TVs simultaneously in the same environment might cause network
slowdowns.[49]

#### [edit] Look and feel

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Apple TV's software is based on Front Row used on Mac OS X.

Apple TV is "simple to operate"[54], and presents an interface based on the
Front Row software for Mac OS X 10.4+ computers. Content is organized into six
groups (Movies, TV Shows, Music, YouTube, Podcasts, and Photos), and is
presented in the initial menu along with a "Settings" options option for Apple
TV configuration, including software updates.[55][56] These initial menu
options then lead to other submenus.[15] The included Apple Remote is used to
navigate through the menus by using the up or down buttons and selecting
options with the play button. The left/right buttons are used to perform
rewind and fast-forward functions while viewing video content, but also
perform previous song/next song functionality when selecting audio-only
content.[30]

Aside from "Movies" and "TV Shows" content, the "TV Shows" options allows the
user to sort contents by show or date and the "Movies" option also allows the
user to view movie trailers for new releases, just as the Front Row software
does on a Mac. All video content, including movies, TV shows, music videos,
and video podcasts, includes bookmark functionality. Apple TV automatically
bookmarks video content midstream to continue playback at a later time.[57]
The "Music" submenu offers similar options to those found on an iPod,
presenting the available music sorted by Artist, Album, Songs, Genres, and
Composers, as well as offering a shuffle option and listing available
audiobooks. As categories are selected with the remote, animated album art is
displayed on the side of the display for the contents of the selected
category. While playing "audio-only" content such as music and audio podcasts,
Apple TV periodically moves album art and content info on the TV display to
prevent burn-in on video displays.[57]

#### [edit] Content support

Content has to be in certain formats to play on the Apple TV.[30] It supports
video encoded with either the H.264 video codec for a maximum resolution of
720p (up to 1280x720 pixels) at 25 frame/s or the MPEG-4 video codec for a
maximum resolution of 720x432 (432p) or 640x480 pixels at 30 frame/s. Audio
can be encoded with AAC (16-320 kbit/s), MP3 (16-320 kbit/s, with VBR), Apple
Lossless, AIFF, or WAV audio codecs. It also has support for files encrypted
with the FairPlay Digital Rights Management technology. For photos it supports
the JPEG, BMP, GIF, TIFF, and PNG image file formats.[1] Attempts to sync
unsupported content to Apple TV will result in iTunes error message(s) because
iTunes supports more formats than Apple TV.[58]

Apple TV supports content purchased or rented from the iTunes store on Apple
TV itself or from a networked computer running the iTunes software client.
Both video and audio-only podcasts are supported and media companies are
currently producing Apple TV-compatible video podcasts.[59]

Apple TVs audio chip supports 7.1 surround sound,[60] and some High Definition
rentals from iTunes are offered with Dolby Digital 5.1 surround sound.[61]

Aside from content obtained from Internet media services, Apple included an
Apple TV export option in an update to their QuickTime software that was
released at the same time as Apple TV. This allows content in some formats
that the device does not support to be easily re-encoded into accepted formats
for playback on the device.[62] Applications which make use of QuickTime to
export media also have access to the Apple TV export option, for example
iMovie (from the "Share" menu)[63] and iTunes (from the "Advanced" menu)[64].
Some third-party content conversion tools also provide Apple TV export options
and Macworld has created a guide for using the tools to convert media to Apple
TV-compatible formats.[65]

## [edit] Specifications

<IMG>

<IMG>

Rear connectors including power, USB for firmware updates, Ethernet, HDMI,
component video and audio, and optical audio.

Processor Intel[1] 1.0 GHz "Crofton" Processor[3]  
Graphics NVIDIA GeForce Go 7300 (64 MB VRAM)[66]  
Memory 256 MB of 400 MHz DDR2 SDRAM[4]  
Hard drive 40 or 160 GB hard disk[1][4]  
Connectivity

  * USB 2.0 (officially for diagnostic use only, though hackers have managed to allow connectivity of hard disks, mice, and keyboards)[67]
  * infrared receiver
  * HDMI
  * Component Video.[1]

  
Networking

  * 10BASE-T/100BASE-T Ethernet
  * 802.11 b, g, n wireless networking (AirPort)[1]

  
Output

  * 1080p/1080i 60/50 Hz (but maximum video resolution is 720p)[1]
  * 720p 60/50 Hz[1]
  * 576p/576i 50 Hz (PAL)[1]
  * 480p/480i* 60 Hz[1][11]

  
Audio

  * S/PDIF digital optical audio
  * RCA analog stereo audio[1]

  
Power Built-in universal 48W power supply[1]  
Dimensions 197x197x28 mm (7.7x7.7x1.1 in)[1]  
Weight 1.09 kg (2.4 lb)[1]  
Software Updates 1.1 (June 20, 2007) YouTube integration, slideshow
screensaver, parental controls, framework updates, security updates,[68][69]
photo priority and browsing other iTunes stores.[70]

iTunes 7.3 (June 29, 2007) Apple TV Photo Streaming[71]

2.0 aka "Take Two" (Feb 12, 2008) Standalone iTunes Store features (directly
from Apple TV through the Internet): rent standard and HD movies with Dolby
Digital 5.1 surround sound, buy TV Shows, music and music videos. Content
automatically syncs back to the user's computer. Podcast directory of over one
hundred thousand video and audio podcasts. View photos from .Mac and Flickr
galleries. Play iTunes content on the audio system connected to the Apple TV
via AirTunes,[2][72] limited Internet radio support,[44][43] show everything
or only synced content, TV show display tweaks, iPhoto events, and enhanced
parental controls.[41]

2.1 (July 10, 2008) Movie Wish List, Support for Remote application, AirTunes
receiver, Photo browser, MobileMe protected albums, Podcasts browsable by
video and audio, Security fixes.[2][73]

2.2 (October 2, 2008) HD TV shows, Movie browsing by actor and director,
Chapter selection, alternate audio and subtitles, Movie description, Genius
playlists, On-The-Go playlists, Music videos in playlists, Apple TV standby
mode, Security fixes.[2][74]

2.3 (November 24, 2008) AirTunes Streaming from Apple TV, Third-party Remote
Controls, Playlists, Music Volume Control.[2][34][33]

2.3.1 (February 25, 2009) Network Test[2][75]  
Video and audio cables are not included with Apple TV.  
*480p is the lowest TV resolution officially supported by Apple; 480i is unofficially supported.  
## [edit] Modifications and hacks

As soon as the Apple TV was released, users began examining it to see if it
could be modified. Hacks were available for Apple TV within days of the
release. Apple is not currently preventing users from installing Apple TV
hacks, but users are warned that applying hacks will void the product's
warranty.[76]

Particular attention was paid to the device's operating system, which had been
described by Walt Mossberg before the release as "a modified version of the
Mac operating system".[77] Users worked out how to access the device remotely
through SSH,[78] how to get Apple TV's version of Front Row running on other
Apple computers,[79] and how to install regular versions of Mac OS X v10.4[80]
or Linux[81] on the device. News sites reported that some users had determined
how to add support for other codecs[82] and create Front Row plugins.[83][84]

Initially, hacking required physical changes to the hardware; the bottom
rubber panel was removed (which is near impossible to do perfectly) and the
hard drive connected to a computer. This leaves the rubber not fully connected
and a sticky residue on the bottom metal. It is an aesthetic barrier to
modification.[85] Because of this, AppleTVHacks.net and FatWallet.com offered
a US$1,000 reward for an external USB drive hack to utilize the USB "service
port".[86] Mid-2007, the USB hack was released.[87] The community-created
"Patchstick" project enables Apple TV owners to add software modifications
using the USB hack. Users can download a Patchstick image to a USB drive and
reboot the Apple TV from the drive. Software is then automatically transferred
from the USB drive to the Apple TV device.[88][89] A commercial version of the
Patchstick was released mid-2008, the aTV Flash software. This software allows
playback of common media files and includes a web browser, RSS reader and
ability to download metadata from the IMDB. In a similar way to the open-
source Patchstick method, the aTV Flash requires no physical modifications to
the Apple TV.[90]

Creating the open-source Patchstick was a manual effort until the Mac atvusb-
creator application was released in late 2008 on Google Code.[91][92] atvusb-
creator is noted as the "easiest way" to create the Patchstick and loads a USB
drive with dropbear ssh, bin tools including compression and FTP utilities,
and two plugins (SoftwareMenu and XBMC Media Center/Boxee
Installer/Launcher).[93][83] Boxee is an open-source "media center application
based on XBMC with a social networking spin" and includes its own plugins for
Internet media services such as Flickr, Last.fm, Shoutcast, Joost, Comedy
Central, MTV, Netflix, and Hulu.[94][95][96][97][98] Boxee also includes user-
defined RSS audio, video, torrent and text feeds.[99]

The Apple TV software updates typically remove any software hacks that are
installed. Major hacks are updated on a regular basis and the Apple TV device
can easily be re-hacked.[100][68][101][102][103] The most common method used
to "re-hack" is by using the Patchstick to reload hacks after an Apple TV
software update.[104] Although major hacks have been updated, most Front Row
plugins have not been updated to work with Apple TV 2.x. AwkwardTV reports 10
plugins out of 32 have been certified to be compatible with the "Take Two"
update.[105]

Hardware modifications allow users to expand Apple TVs capabilities. Customers
can upgrade the hard drive on their Apple TVs,[106] although a repair company
like iResQ can install hard drive upgrades with data transfer. The company
offers upgrades to 80GB, 120GB, 160GB, and 250GB hard drives.[107] Another
hardware hack allows the Apple TV to output color through composite
video[108][109][110][111] This hardware-based hack, which requires inexpensive
hardware to trick the built-in operating system, enables users with non-HDTV
TV sets, for which the Apple TV was originally designed,[112] to connect Apple
TVs to them.

## [edit] Limitations

### [edit] Functionality

Concerns have been expressed about the lack of personal video recorder
capabilities on Apple TV.[30][58] Apple TV does not contain a TV tuner, but a
tuner and PVR capability can be applied on the connected home computer through
a third party. The PVR software will connect to iTunes, enabling scheduled
HDTV recordings to automatically appear on Apple TV for playback.[113] One
such PVR idea says that Apple should buy TiVo and another mentions that Apple
should go a step further and turn Apple TV into a fully-functional cable
box.[114][115] Critics against the DVR/TiVo idea mention that the DVR market
is dead and call the DVR the "PDA of the living room".[116]

Some people feel that the Front Row interface is lacking standard iTunes
functionality, including rating items, synchronizing from more than one
computer, [117] full Internet radio support,[35][116] and games.[118] After
the success of the iPhone SDK and the App Store, it has been mentioned that
Apple TV should provide the same functionality so that programmers can provide
third party applications using Apple TVs interface without having to hack the
Apple TV device.[114][116][119] The website Apple TV Junkie was created to
"list of all new HD & SD rental titles released on a daily basis", something
which the Apple TV interface does not provide today.[120] Critics claim that
Apple TVs TV-based interface is "cluttered" and difficult to browse or search
for a specific movie. Users are asking for Netflix-like functionality,
including queues and "watched" flags or dates.[121][122]

Movie rentals on iTunes can be transferred to any video-enabled iPod, iPhone
or Apple TV for playing, but any movie rented on Apple TV must be watched on
Apple TV.[123][21] To copy a movie purchased on Apple TV to a video-enabled
iPod or iPhone, the movie must first be transferred to an iTunes-enabled
computer on the network.[124]

Apple TV/itunes is "not designed" to sync or stream content from networked
drives to Apple TV. Customers have mixed results when using a NAS to store
Apple TV content.[125] Content which can be synced or streamed to Apple TV has
to be on the local drive or an external drive directly connected to the
iTunes-enabled computer.

### [edit] Content

Critics have stated that content flexibility is weak with Apple TV. For
Internet media services, Apple TV doesn't connect to Amazon or Rhapsody for
music, movie rental services Jaman and HungryFlix, Internet radio services
Shoutcast and Last.fm, Google photo service Picasa (although Google's YouTube
is supported), or video services Hulu, Joost, CBS, MTV, CNN, the WB, Comedy
Central and TV.com.[114][116][126][95][96][97][98] User-defined RSS audio,
video and text feeds are not supported by Apple TV.[83][99]Audible purchases
from audible.com are not compatible with Apple TV,[127] and iTunes U content
is desired on Apple TV.[116]

Although Apple TV has a "Closed Captioning" setting, closed
captioning/subtitles are not available for most Apple TV/iTunes store
content.[128][129]

Pricing for Apple TV/iTunes store content has been a concern. Content is
priced under Apple's standard "pay-per-view" model, while some users have been
asking for a subscription-based model (such as Netflix, Blockbuster Total
Access or Hollywood Video MVP)[121][122][22] or free, ad-supported content
(such as Hulu). Reviewers note that Apple TV sales may benefit from a
partnership with Netflix or Hulu.[116]

Apple TV is seen by some to have limited out-of-the-box support for video and
audio codecs,[30][35][58] although Apple TV supports the same MP4 and H.264
codecs the video iPod and iPhone do.[130] Media conversion tools are
available, but conversion "almost always" involves a loss of quality as well
as the time and effort costs to perform the conversions.[131]

Image quality of Apple TV content has also been noted as a concern. 1080i or
1080p HD content (e.g. content originating from HD cameras) must be downgraded
in quality for use on Apple TV. Users without the technical knowledge to
convert HD content to lower quality may have to resort to downloading low-
quality iTunes Store movie content.[30][35][52][132][133] Note that iTunes
Store 720p HD-quality content is available via video podcasts.[59] Apple also
offers 4 Mbit/s H.264 720p HD movies for rental via iTunes.[134] For
comparison, broadcast and cable HD movies are up to 19 Mbit/s MPEG2 720p and
Blu-ray HD movies are up to 40 Mbit/s H.264 or VC-1 1080p.[135][136][137]

### [edit] Hardware

Apple TV content cannot be used with older televisions, although 480i is
unofficially supported as long as the TV supports component video
connectivity. RCA/composite video and F/RF connectors are not included on the
Apple TV device. Reviewers have noted that Apple is "future-proofing", and "if
you do not have HDTV now, you will in the future".[1][35][58][77][131][138]

The Apple Remote can control volume, but only for Music on Apple TV.[34][33]

Apple TV comes with only a power cable. Apple has teamed up with a third party
to provide cables for its customers.[139] A USB port is included on the
device, but it is reserved for service use only.

The Apple TV device runs "very hot",[35] sometimes reaching 44Â° C (111Â°
F).[131][140] According to Apple, this is normal.[141] There is no off button
or function on the Apple TV (although there is a sleep function) so the only
way to cool the Apple TV is to unplug it in sleep mode.

Apple's Mac mini in many ways is a more expensive, and fuller featured
substitute that addresses many issues of past and current Apple TV models, but
is almost impossible without the use of a keyboard and mouse for
navigation.[142][23] Christopher Breen noted: âWhere the mini falls flat is
as a client for a larger media server...From my experience itâs clear that
one can assemble a multimedia center with a small computer at its core, but
doing so takes time and money and the result doesnât provide the convenience
of traditional AV gear. There must be a better way. My moneyâs on Apple one
day providing it.â[31]

### [edit] Former limitations

In March 2007, reviewers mentioned the lack of expansion options once the hard
drive on the 40 GB model fills up.[30][35][58][77] In late May 2007, Apple
introduced a version of the Apple TV with 160 GB of storage space.[143]
Another former limitation required photos to be synced to the device,[77] but
this was fixed in a June 2007 iTunes update.[71]

Many different features were added in the February 2008 release of the 2.0
("Take 2") software update, features which some of Apple TV's competitors had
provided already. Concerns were raised about the Apple TV when it was
originally released regarding the dependency on connectivity to a home
computer via iTunes. Although users could view YouTube as well as movie and TV
previews directly through the Internet, most content had to originate from the
connected home computer. An Apple TV user could not purchase or download
iTunes content directly from Apple TV. After the update, all Apple TVs can
download and purchase content from the iTunes Store directly without
connecting to a computer.[30][58] For audio, Apple TV had only officially
supported Dolby Pro Logic simulated 5.1,[52] though unofficially the full 5.1
Surround Sound digital discrete worked if a 5.1-capable receiver was connected
via the optical cable to Apple TV and the audio content was encoded as
lossless.[144][145] QuickTime and Apple TV did not ship with an AC-3
codec,[146] and iTunes Store content only supported 4.0 surround sound.[147]
News sites were reporting that some users had worked out how to add AC-3
(Dolby Digital) 5.1 channel support by hacking the unit.[148] After the
update, users were able to rent movies in standard or high definition with
Dolby Digital 5.1 surround. Standard iTunes functionality, including
shuffling, interrupting a shuffle, and displaying a video timeline[149] were
added to the Front Row interface. Yahoo!'s Ben Patterson has criticized Apple
for having "lost interest" in the Apple TV with "a full six months passing
since the last Apple TV software update".[150] However, this criticism, while
warranted, was stated in advance of the Apple TV "Take 2" update.

The 2.2 update added the ability to add songs to On-The-Go playlists as well
as the ability to generate Genius playlists. Many users complained about the
lack of "Genius" functionality after the release of iTunes 8.0. It also meant
that users could buy HD television shows. Before the 2.3 update, the Apple
remote could be used on a Macintosh computer for both Front Row navigation as
well as volume control, but could not be used the same way on Apple
TV.[30][58][77][131]

## [edit] Sales

Within the first week of presales in January 2007, Apple TV was the top
selling item at the Apple Store.[151] Orders exceeded 100,000 units by the end
of January and Apple began ramping-up to sell over a million units prior to
the 2007 holiday season.[152] Analysts began to see the device as a "DVD
killer"[153] that has the ability to enable multiple services. Analysts also
predicted that Apple could sell up to 1.5 million units in the first
year.[154] Besides the Apple Store, Best Buy was one of the first retailers to
carry the device;[155] Target[156] and Costco[157] followed shortly
thereafter.

Two months into sales, Forrester Research predicted that Apple would only sell
a million Apple TV units, since advertisement-supported content would win the
war against paid content. Forrester predicted that cable companies would be
the clear winners over content providers such as the iTunes Store.[158]
Shortly after, Apple released YouTube functionality and Jobs stated that Apple
TV was a "DVD player for the Internet". Market analysts immediately saw that
YouTube on Apple TV "provides a glimpse of this product's potential and its
future evolution",[159] but overall, analysts had mixed reactions regarding
the future of Apple TV. Some negative reactions followed after Jobs referred
to the device as a "hobby", implying it was less significant than the
Macintosh, iPod, and iPhone.[160]

In Apple's first quarter 2009 financial results conference call, acting chief
executive Tim Cook stated that Apple TV sales increased three times over the
same quarter a year ago. Cook mentioned that the movie rental business was
working well for Apple, Apple would continue investment in movie rentals and
Apple TV, but Apple TV is still considered a hobby for the company.[161] Due
to the growth of digital TV and consumers turning to Internet media services,
an analyst predicted sales of 6.6 million Apple TVs by the end of 2009.[119]

## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Apple TV  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Apple TV  
  * AirPort Express, the audio-only antecedent of Apple TV (by use of AirTunes).
  * Apple Interactive Television Box, a set-top box developed by Apple in the mid-1990s.
  * Apple Bandai Pippin, a multimedia set-top entertainment networking device designed by Apple and sold during the mid-1990s.
  * Home theater PC
  * Macintosh TV, Apple's first attempt at computer-television integration in the early 1990s.
  * Mac Mini, Apple's smallest full featured computer which competes with Apple TV as a higher end home theater PC.
  * Media center
  * Media PC

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r "Apple TV - Tech Specs". Apple Inc.. http://www.apple.com/appletv/specs.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  2. ^ a b c d e f g "Apple TV: About Apple TV software updates" (in English). Apple. 2008-11-19. http://support.apple.com/kb/HT3187. Retrieved on 2008-11-20.
  3. ^ a b "What's inside an Apple TV: Tear-down reveals (almost) all". AppleInsider. 2007-03-28. http://www.appleinsider.com/articles/07/03/28/whats_inside_an_apple_tv_tear_down_reveals_almost_all.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-01.
  4. ^ a b c Shimpi, Anand Lal (2007-03-22). "AppleTV". AnandTech. http://www.anandtech.com/mac/showdoc.aspx?i=2951. Retrieved on 2007-03-23.
  5. ^ "Apple TV Now Shipping". Apple press release. 2007-03-21. http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2007/03/21appletv.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  6. ^ Cohen, Peter (2006-09-12). "Apple 'It's Showtime!' event". Macworld. http://www.macworld.com/article/52855/2006/09/showtime.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-13.
  7. ^ "Apple TV Now Shipping". Apple Inc.. 2007-03-21. http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2007/03/21appletv.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  8. ^ "What is Apple TV?". Apple. http://www.apple.com/appletv/whatis.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-11.
  9. ^ "Apple to build new features into iPhone, Apple TV free of charge". AppleInsider. 2007-04-08. http://www.appleinsider.com/articles/07/04/25/apple_to_build_new_features_into_iphone_apple_tv_free_of_charge.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-29.
  10. ^ "News Roundup: iPod Sales Mega-Milestone, Microsoft Goes DRM-Free, and More". MacLife.com. 2007-04-09. http://www.maclife.com/article/news_roundup_ipod_sales_milestone_microsoft_goes_drm_free_and_more. Retrieved on 2007-04-09.
  11. ^ a b Miller, Paul (2007-03-23). "Apple TV kinda sorta works with certain 4:3 SD TVs". Engadget. http://www.engadget.com/2007/03/23/apple-tv-kinda-sorta-works-with-certain-4-3-sd-tvs/. Retrieved on 2007-04-11.
  12. ^ a b "Running Apple TV without Internet". Apple. http://discussions.apple.com/thread.jspa?threadID=1721413&tstart=105. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  13. ^ "Photos of AppleTV update: YouTube, security". MacNN. 2007-06-20. http://www.macnn.com/articles/07/06/20/apple.tv.11/. Retrieved on 2007-06-30.
  14. ^ Horwitz, Jeremy (2007-06-20). "The Complete Guide to Apple TV 1.1 Software and YouTube". iLounge. http://www.ilounge.com/index.php/articles/comments/10329/. Retrieved on 2007-07-16.
  15. ^ a b c d Lynch, Jim (2008-02-15). "Hands On with Apple TV 2.0". ExtremeTech. http://www.extremetech.com/article2/0,2845,2260565,00.asp. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  16. ^ Murph, Darren (2008-12-05). "YouTube goes HD, finally!". "EngadgetHD". http://www.engadgethd.com/2008/12/05/youtube-goes-hd-finally/. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  17. ^ "YouTube HD on apple TV". MacRumors. 2009-03-01. http://forums.macrumors.com/showthread.php?t=659508. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  18. ^ Edwards, Cliff (2008-01-15). "Jobs Appeals to the Crowd". BusinessWeek. http://www.businessweek.com/technology/content/jan2008/tc20080115_014182.htm?campaign_id=rss_topStories. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  19. ^ Seff, Jonathan (2008-05-01). "Apple adds movie purchasing to Apple TV". InfoWorld. http://www.infoworld.com/news/feeds/08/05/01/Apple-adds-movie-purchasing-to-Apple-TV.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  20. ^ "How to Purchase TV Shows, Movies, Music, and Music Videos on Apple TV". Apple. 2009-02-20. http://support.apple.com/kb/HT1860. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  21. ^ a b "How to rent a movie from the iTunes Store on Apple TV". Apple. 2008-12-01. http://support.apple.com/kb/HT1498. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  22. ^ a b Patel, Nilay (2009-03-19). "Apple adds HD video purchases to the iTunes Store". engadgetHD. http://www.engadgethd.com/2009/03/19/apple-adds-hd-video-purchases-to-the-itunes-store?icid=sphere_blogsmith_inpage_tuaw. Retrieved on 2009-03-21.
  23. ^ a b Pegoraro, Rob (2009-03-20). "Apple Liberates HD Movies From Apple TV". Washnigton Post. http://voices.washingtonpost.com/fasterforward/2009/03/apple_liberates_hd_movies_from.html?wprss=fasterforward. Retrieved on 2009-03-21.
  24. ^ Laporte, Leo; Mann, Syverson, Gamble, Macpherson of Tiki Bar TV (2007-03-26). "TWiT 92: The Tiki Gods". TWiT. http://www.twit.tv/92. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  25. ^ Colligan, Paul (2008-02-13). "7 Ways Apple TV Changes The Game And What Podcasters Need To Know And Do About It". http://www.paulcolligan.com/. http://www.paulcolligan.com/2008/02/13/7-ways-apple-tv-changes/. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  26. ^ Heid, Jim (2008-02-19). "Apple TV "Take Two" Flickrs Dimly". Maclife. http://www.macilife.com/2008/02/apple-tv-take-two-flickrs-dimly.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  27. ^ "Apple TV: Using AirTunes". Apple Inc.. 2008-11-20. http://support.apple.com/kb/HT3291. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  28. ^ Apple WDS Setup
  29. ^ Apple.com- iTunes Remote
  30. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Cheng, Jacqui; Ecker, Clint (2007-03-27). "Apple TV: an in-depth review". Ars Technica. http://arstechnica.com/hardware/reviews/2007/03/appletv.ars. Retrieved on 2007-04-02.
  31. ^ a b Breen, Christopher (2006-05-31). "My multimedia Mac mini". Macworld. http://www.macworld.com/article/51113/2006/05/multimediamini.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-21.
  32. ^ "Pairing and Unpairing the Apple Remote with Apple TV". Apple Inc.. http://support.apple.com/kb/HT1555. Retrieved on 2007-04-21.
  33. ^ a b c Carlson, Jeff (2008-11-21). "Apple TV 2.3 Adds AirTunes, Volume Control". TidBITS. http://db.tidbits.com/article/9875?rss. Retrieved on 2009-03-11.
  34. ^ a b c d McNulty, Scott (2008-11-24). "Apple TV 2.3: Now With More Remotes, and Remote Music". PC World. http://www.pcworld.com/article/154421/apple_tv_23_now_with_more_remotes_and_remote_music.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  35. ^ a b c d e f g h Falcone, John P. (2007-03-27). "Review: Apple TV best for iTunes addicts". CNN. http://www.cnn.com/2007/TECH/ptech/03/27/apple.tv/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  36. ^ Breen, Christopher (2007-07-06). "Harmony Remote and the Apple TV". Macworld. http://www.macworld.com/article/58797/2007/07/harmonyappletv.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-15.
  37. ^ "About Remote Learning on Apple TV". Apple Inc.. 2008-11-20. http://support.apple.com/kb/HT3296. Retrieved on 2009-03-11.
  38. ^ Ricker, Thomas (2008-7-10). "Apple's Remote: turns your iPhone into a WiFi remote control". Engadget. http://www.engadget.com/2008/07/10/apples-remote-control-application-for-itunes-and-apple-tv/. Retrieved on 2008-07-14.
  39. ^ Bohon, Cory (2008-7-10). "Apple TV 2.1 update goes live, adds MobileMe support". The Unofficial Apple Weblog. http://www.tuaw.com/2008/07/10/apple-tv-2-1-update-goes-live-adds-mobileme-support/. Retrieved on 2008-07-14.
  40. ^ "My Apple TV Take Two Review: Ripping DVDs, Creating a Media Library, and HD Downloads". http://myhdtvchoice.com/. 2008-03-01. http://myhdtvchoice.com/2008/03/01/my-apple-tv-take-2-review-ripping-dvds-creating-a-media-library-and-hd-downloads/. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  41. ^ a b "My Take on Apple TV, Take Two". http://tunegardener.com/. 2008-02-17. http://tunegardener.com/2008/02/17/my-take-on-apple-tv-take-two/. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  42. ^ "Liberate Your Memories: Home Movies on Your Apple TV". "theAppleBlog". 2008-10-08. http://theappleblog.com/2008/10/08/home-movies-on-your-appletv/. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  43. ^ a b Breen, Christopher (2008-09-04). "Adding streaming radio to Apple TV". Macworld. http://www.macworld.com/article/135380/2008/09/addradiotoappletv.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-13.
  44. ^ a b Lu, Mat (2008-04-30). "Apple TV offers limited internet radio support". The Unofficial Apple Weblog. http://www.tuaw.com/2008/04/30/apple-tv-offers-limited-internet-radio-support/. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  45. ^ "Apple TV bridges gap - sort of". The Washington Post. 2007-04-08. http://www.courier-journal.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20070408/BUSINESS/704080425/1003. Retrieved on 2007-04-13.
  46. ^ "iTunes for Windows 8.0 Help: Syncing your Apple TV with iTunes". Apple Inc.. http://docs.info.apple.com/article.html?path=iTunesWin/8.0/en/22082.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-14.
  47. ^ "Apple TV: Syncing Photos via iTunes". Apple Inc.. http://support.apple.com/kb/HT2265. Retrieved on 2009-03-15.
  48. ^ Fleishman, Glenn (2007-01-18). "Inside 802.11n". Macworld. http://www.macworld.com/2007/01/features/80211n/index.php. Retrieved on 2007-04-13.
  49. ^ a b Horwitz, Jeremy (2007-03-23). "Apple Inc. Apple TV". iLounge. http://www.ilounge.com/index.php/reviews/entry/apple-inc-apple-tv/. Retrieved on 2007-04-13.
  50. ^ "Apple TV: Streaming photos via iTunes". Apple Inc.. http://support.apple.com/kb/HT1273. Retrieved on 2009-03-15.
  51. ^ sjvn (2007-04-10). "Do you really need to upgrade your Apple TVâs hard drive?". Practical Technology. http://practical-tech.com/entertainment/do-you-really-need-to-upgrade-your-apple-tvs-hard-drive/. Retrieved on 2007-04-13.
  52. ^ a b c Breen, Christopher (2007-03-30). "Apple TV". Macworld. http://www.macworld.com/2007/03/reviews/appletvrev/index.php. Retrieved on 2007-04-22.
  53. ^ "SlingPlayer for Mac finally available". Apple TV Source. 2007-04-30. http://appletvsource.com/content/view/82/1/. Retrieved on 2007-04-30.
  54. ^ Snider, Mike (2007-06-05). "Apple TV vs. TiVo: It's on". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/tech/products/2007-06-05-apple-vs-tivo_N.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  55. ^ "Gallery: Apple TV Take 2 software update". MacNN. 2008-02-12. http://www.macnn.com/articles/08/02/12/apple.tv.gallery/. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  56. ^ "How to update Apple TV software". Apple Inc.. 2008-09-02. http://support.apple.com/kb/HT1600. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  57. ^ a b Breen, Christopher (2007-03-22). "Apple TV Diary: Out of the box". Macworld. http://www.macworld.com/2007/03/firstlooks/atvdiary1/index.php. Retrieved on 2007-04-20.
  58. ^ a b c d e f g Kafasis, Paul (2007-03-22). "AppleTV Surprises And Impressions". Software's Under the Microscope. Rogue Amoeba. http://www.rogueamoeba.com/utm/posts/Article/appleTV-2007-03-22-21-30. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  59. ^ a b "washingtonpost.com launches high-definition video podcasts via Apple iTunes for Apple TV". MacDailyNews. 2007-04-10. http://macdailynews.com/index.php/weblog/comments/13243/. Retrieved on 2007-04-11.
  60. ^ Frakes, Dan (2007-03-28). "Hacking Apple TV". Macworld. http://www.macworld.com/2007/03/firstlooks/atv_hacks/index.php. Retrieved on 2007-04-23.
  61. ^ "Apple TV - HD Movie Rentals". Apple Inc.. http://www.apple.com/appletv/rentals.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-29.
  62. ^ Horwitz, Jeremy (2007-03-18). "QuickTime gains 720P Apple TV high-definition export mode". iLounge. http://www.ilounge.com/index.php/news/comments/quicktime-gains-720p-apple-tv-high-definition-export-mode/9658. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  63. ^ "iMovie 8.0 Help: Watching your movies on Apple TV". Apple Inc.. http://docs.info.apple.com/article.html?path=iMovie/8.0/en/10349.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  64. ^ Breen, Christopher (2009-02-05). "DVD ripping FAQ". Macworld. http://www.macworld.com/article/138674/2009/02/dvdripfaq.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  65. ^ Seff, Jonathan (2007-04-13). "Convert video for Apple TV". Macworld. http://www.macworld.com/2007/04/secrets/atv_videoconvert/index.php?lsrc=mwrss. Retrieved on 2007-04-20.
  66. ^ "Pentium M-based Intel chip at heart of Apple TV". AppleInsider. 2007-01-15. http://www.appleinsider.com/articles/07/01/15/pentium_m_based_intel_chip_at_heart_of_apple_tv.html.
  67. ^ Cheng, Jacqui (2007-01-09). "ARS at Macworld: Questions about the Apple TV". Ars Technica. http://arstechnica.com/journals/apple.ars/2007/1/9/6543. Retrieved on 2007-03-23.
  68. ^ a b staff (2007-07-08). "June 20 2007 Patch (aka the YouTube Patch)". AwkwardTV.org. http://wiki.awkwardtv.org/wiki/June_20_2007_Patch_%28aka_the_YouTube_Patch%29. Retrieved on 2007-07-16.
  69. ^ "About the security content of Apple TV 1.1" (in English). Apple. 2007-06-21. http://support.apple.com/kb/TA24773?viewlocale=en_US. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  70. ^ Breen, Christopher (2007-06-21). "Apple TV beyond YouTube". Macworld. http://www.macworld.com/article/58526/2007/06/atbbeyoneyt.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.
  71. ^ a b AppleInsider Staff (2007-06-29). "iTunes 7.3 supports iPhone, adds Apple TV photo streaming". AppleInsider. http://www.appleinsider.com/articles/07/06/29/itunes_7_3_supports_iphone_adds_apple_tv_photo_streaming.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-30.
  72. ^ Breen, Chris (2008-02-12). "Hands on with Apple TV, Take Two". Macworld. http://www.macworld.com/article/132085/2008/02/apple_tv_take_two.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  73. ^ "APPLE-SA-2008-07-10 Apple TV 2.1" (in English). Apple. 2008-07-10. http://lists.apple.com/archives/security-announce/2008/Jul/msg00000.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  74. ^ "APPLE-SA-2008-10-02 Apple TV 2.2" (in English). Apple. 2008-10-02. http://lists.apple.com/archives/Security-announce/2008/Oct/msg00000.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  75. ^ "Apple updates Apple TV software to version 2.3.1 [Ux3"]. AppleInsider. 2009-02-25. http://www.appleinsider.com/articles/09/02/25/apple_updates_apple_tv_software_to_version_2_3_1.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  76. ^ Cheng, Jacqui (2007-04-05). "Apple denies meddling with Apple TV hacks". Ars Technica. http://arstechnica.com/journals/apple.ars/2007/04/05/apple-denies-meddling-with-apple-tv-hacks. Retrieved on 2007-04-11.
  77. ^ a b c d e Mossberg, Walt (2007-03-21). "From PC to TV -- via Apple". The Wall Street Journal. http://ptech.wsj.com/archive/solution-20070321.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  78. ^ "Applications running on the Apple TV". Apple TV Hacks. 2007-03-24. http://www.appletvhacks.net/2007/03/24/applications-running-on-the-apple-tv/. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  79. ^ "Apple TV running on a Macbook". Apple TV Hacks. 2007-03-27. http://www.appletvhacks.net/2007/03/27/apple-tv-running-on-a-macbook/. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  80. ^ Drawbaugh, Ben (2007-03-31). "Apple TV running full version of OS X". Engadget. http://www.engadget.com/2007/03/31/apple-tv-running-full-version-of-os-x/. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  81. ^ Sadun, Erica (2007-04-10). "Linux on Apple TV". The Unofficial Apple Weblog. http://www.tuaw.com/2007/04/10/linux-on-apple-tv/. Retrieved on 2007-04-11.
  82. ^ "Apple TV Hacked to Run XviD, DiVX to Follow?". Gizmodo. 2007-03-23. http://gizmodo.com/gadgets/home-entertainment/apple-tv-hacked-to-run-xvid-divx-to-follow-246588.php. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  83. ^ a b c Cheng, Jacqui (2007-04-09). "Plugins for the Apple TV: RSS and Perl scripts". Ars Technica. http://arstechnica.com/journals/apple.ars/2007/04/09/plugins-for-the-apple-tv-rss-and-perl-scripts. Retrieved on 2007-04-11.
  84. ^ staff. "The AwkwardTV Plug-in Directory". AwkwardTV. http://plugins.awkwardtv.org. Retrieved on 2009-03-24.
  85. ^ Frakes, Dan (2007-05-30). "Upgrading Apple TV's hard drive". Macworld. http://www.macworld.com/article/57079/2007/03/appletvharddrive.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-21.
  86. ^ "$1000 Bounty for External USB Drive Hack". Apple TV Hacks. 2007-04-08. http://www.appletvhacks.net/2007/04/08/1000-bounty-for-external-usb-drive-hack/. Retrieved on 2007-04-18.
  87. ^ "USB patch released. usb patch released hallelujah!". Apple TV Hacks. 2007-07-28. http://www.appletvhacks.net/2007/07/28/usb-patch-released-hallelujah/. Retrieved on 2007-08-01.
  88. ^ staff (2007-04-18). "Patchstick Working - Unlocks ATV in minutes". Apple TV Hacks blog. blogspot. http://appletvhacks.blogspot.com/2007/04/patchstick-working-unlocks-atv-in.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-21.
  89. ^ staff. "Patchstick". AwkwardTV wiki. AwkwardTV. http://wiki.awkwardtv.org/wiki/Patchstick. Retrieved on 2009-03-24.
  90. ^ Popular Science - Polish the Apple TV
  91. ^ staff. "Beginners Guide for 2.x". AwkwardTV wiki. AwkwardTV. http://wiki.awkwardtv.org/wiki/Beginners_Guide2. Retrieved on 2009-03-24.
  92. ^ staff. "atvusb-creator". ohloh review. ohloh. http://www.ohloh.net/p/atvusb-creator. Retrieved on 2009-03-24.
  93. ^ Todd Harter. "atvusb-creator - Google Code". Twine Bookmark. Twine. http://www.twine.com/item/123609nvc-6fw/atvusb-creator-google-code. Retrieved on 2009-03-24.
  94. ^ Mat Lu. "Install Boxee or XBMC on an Apple TV". via Engadget. The Unofficial Apple Weblog. http://www.tuaw.com/tag/atvusb-creator/. Retrieved on 2009-03-24.
  95. ^ a b staff. "Hack Your Apple TV With Boxee". Wired articles. Wired. http://howto.wired.com/wiki/Hack_Your_Apple_TV_With_Boxee. Retrieved on 2009-03-24.
  96. ^ a b John Mahoney. "How To: Max Out Apple TV's Potential With Boxee". Gizmodo How-To. Gizmodo. http://gizmodo.com/5082130/how-to-max-out-apple-tvs-potential-with-boxee. Retrieved on 2009-03-24.
  97. ^ a b Harrison Hoffman. "Boxee plugs into Joost, MTV Music". The Web Services Report blog. Cnet News. http://news.cnet.com/8301-13515_3-10136340-26.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-24.
  98. ^ a b Purdy, Kevin (2009-01-29). "Cut the Cable For Good with Boxee and Apple TV". LifeHacker. http://lifehacker.com/5138423/cut-the-cable-for-good-with-boxee-and-apple-tv. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  99. ^ a b Heater, Brian (2009-03-06). "Boxee Circumvents Hulu Ban with RSS Reader". PC Magazine. http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2342648,00.asp?kc=PCRSS03069TX1K0001121. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  100. ^ staff (2007-06-21). "AppleTV Software Updated". AwkwardTV.org. http://www.awkwardtv.org/?p=51. Retrieved on 2007-07-16.
  101. ^ HackTV Take 2: The AppleTV Hack Upgrade Liveblog
  102. ^ Take 2 Safe Update
  103. ^ John Biggs (2009-03-02). "How to recover Boxee/XBMC after the Apple TV update". CrunchGear. http://www.crunchgear.com/2009/03/02/how-to-recover-boxeexbmc-after-the-apple-tv-update/. Retrieved on 2009-03-24.
  104. ^ aTV: plug and play Apple TV hacking
  105. ^ staff. "ATV2-Compatible Plugins". AwkwardTV. http://wiki.awkwardtv.org/wiki/ATV2-Compatible_Plugins. Retrieved on 2009-03-24.
  106. ^ "DIY: Apple TV Hard Drive Upgraded to 120GB". Gizmodo. 2007-03-23. http://gizmodo.com/gadgets/home-entertainment/diy-apple-tv-hard-drive-upgraded-to-120gb-246567.php. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  107. ^ iResQ.com Apple TV hard drive upgrades
  108. ^ "How to use your Apple TV under Composite WITH COLOR". http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eQNFCjKrVlc.
  109. ^ TUAW (unofficial Apple weblog) : Found Footage: Apple TV Composite Hack in Full Color
  110. ^ Reghardware: How to get colour composite-video from an Apple TV
  111. ^ Wired Blogs: Apple TV Hacked to Output Full Composite Color
  112. ^ Ars at Macworld: Questions about the AppleTV.
  113. ^ Sadun, Erica (2007-04-18). "Elgato releases EyeTV 2.4 update". The Unofficial Apple Weblog. http://www.tuaw.com/2007/04/18/elgato-releases-eyetv-2-4-update. Retrieved on 2007-04-20.
  114. ^ a b c Hesseldahl, Arik (2009-02-03). "Apple TV: Time to Get Serious". BusinessWeek. http://www.businessweek.com/technology/content/feb2009/tc2009023_256119.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-16.
  115. ^ "BusinessWeek: Tripling unit sales show Apple TV is more than just a hobby". macdailynews.com. 2009-02-04. http://macdailynews.com/index.php/weblog/comments/19986/. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  116. ^ a b c d e f Dilger, Daniel Eran (2009-02-05). "How Apple TV can score at the big 3.0". RoughlyDrafted Magazine. http://www.roughlydrafted.com/2009/02/05/how-apple-tv-can-score-at-the-big-30/. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  117. ^ Chartier, David (2007-03-29). "Apple TV: What you can't do". The Unofficial Apple Weblog. http://www.tuaw.com/2007/03/29/apple-tv-what-you-cant-do/. Retrieved on 2007-04-04.
  118. ^ Berka, Justin (2007-03-07). "Apple TV might have games, eventually". Ars Technica. http://arstechnica.com/journals/apple.ars/2007/03/07/apple-tv-might-have-games-eventually. Retrieved on 2007-07-21.
  119. ^ a b "Is Apple planning a DVR and web-enabled TV set?". TechRadar.com. 2009-03-02. http://www.techradar.com/news/computing/apple/is-apple-planning-a-dvr-and-web-enabled-tv-set--559416. Retrieved on 2009-03-18.
  120. ^ Bohon, Cory (2008-06-08). "Apple TV Junkie: Know what's going on in the movie world". The Unofficial Apple Weblog. http://www.tuaw.com/tag/Apple+TV+Junkie/. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  121. ^ a b "Netflix reveals $100 Apple TV competitor". AppleInsider. 2008-05-20. http://www.appleinsider.com/articles/08/05/20/netflix_reveals_100_apple_tv_competitor.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  122. ^ a b Howard, Todd (2008-05-05). "Why Apple TV Needs a Subscription Offering". Zoom In Online. http://www.zoom-in.com/blog/film-tv/todd-howard/why-apple-tv-needs-subscription-offering. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  123. ^ "iTunes Store movie rental usage rights in the United States". Apple Inc.. 2008-12-17. http://support.apple.com/kb/HT1415. Retrieved on 2000-03-17.
  124. ^ Block, Ryan (2008-01-16). "iTunes and Apple TV rentals and purchases: what you can (and can't) do". Engadget. http://www.engadget.com/2008/01/16/itunes-and-apple-tv-rentals-and-purchases-what-you-can-and-can/4#comments. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  125. ^ "Apple TV and a NAS". "Apple Discussions". 2008-04-15. http://discussions.apple.com/thread.jspa?threadID=1368925&tstart=180. Retrieved on 2009-03-15.
  126. ^ Reardon, Marguerite (2009-03-09). "Dreaming of cutting the subscription TV cord". cNet News. http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-10189658-93.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  127. ^ "Apple TV: What kinds of music and movies can I play on Apple TV?". Apple Inc.. 2008-12-02. http://support.apple.com/kb/HT1532. Retrieved on 2000-03-17.
  128. ^ Stone, Adam (2008-01-21). "Apple Adds Closed Captioning Support for AppleTV, But Content Falls Short". DeafDC.com Blog. http://www.deafdc.com/blog/adam-stone/2008-01-21/apple-adds-closed-captioning-support-for-appletv-but-content-falls-short/. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  129. ^ "Topic : Closed Caption or Subtitles on Movies in iTunes for AppleTV". Apple Discussions. 2008-09-10. http://discussions.apple.com/thread.jspa?threadID=1661568. Retrieved on 2009-03-18.
  130. ^ Hollington, Jesse David (2007-07-13). "The Complete Guide to iPod, Apple TV and iPhone Video Formats". iLounge. http://www.ilounge.com/index.php/articles/comments/the-complete-guide-to-ipod-video-formats-and-display-resolutions/. Retrieved on 2007-07-22.
  131. ^ a b c d Tomczak, Jason (2007-03-25). "Apple TV". Digital Trends. http://reviews.digitaltrends.com/review4328_intro21647.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-25.
  132. ^ Sadun, Erica (2007-04-05). "AP disses Apple TV". The Unofficial Apple Weblog. http://www.tuaw.com/2007/04/05/ap-disses-apple-tv/. Retrieved on 2007-04-10.
  133. ^ Reynolds, Paul (2007-03-21). "Apple TV: Is it a âmust-seeâ show". Consumer Reports. http://blogs.consumerreports.org/electronics/2007/03/apple_tv_is_it_.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-22.
  134. ^ Ou, George. "Donât believe the low bit-rate âHDâ lie". ZDNet. http://blogs.zdnet.com/Ou/?p=959.
  135. ^ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MPEG-2#ATSC_and_ISDB-T
  136. ^ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_high_definition_optical_disc_formats
  137. ^ Hereâs what fake HD video looks like | George Ou | ZDNet.com
  138. ^ Horwitz, Jeremy (2007-03-21). "Top Ten Reasons You Donât Need Apple TV (Yet)". iLounge. http://www.ilounge.com/index.php/articles/comments/top-ten-reasons-you-dont-need-apple-tv-yet/. Retrieved on 2007-04-23.
  139. ^ Drawbaugh, Ben (2007-01-10). "XtremeMac HDMI switch and cables for Apple TV". Engadget. http://www.engadget.com/2007/01/10/xtrememac-hdmi-switch-and-cables-for-apple-tv/. Retrieved on 2007-04-11.
  140. ^ Tomczak, Jason (2007-03-28). "Apple TV Heat Test". Digital Trends. http://news.digitaltrends.com/featured_article76.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-26.
  141. ^ "Apple TV may feel warm to touch". Apple Inc.. http://docs.info.apple.com/article.html?artnum=305356. Retrieved on 2007-07-21.
  142. ^ Akhtar, Iyaz (2007-01-16). "Apple TV vs. Mac mini - Which one is right for you?". the Apple Blog. http://theappleblog.com/2007/01/16/apple-tv-vs-mac-mini-which-one-is-right-for-you. Retrieved on 2009-03-18.
  143. ^ "YouTube Coming to Apple TV". Apple Inc.. 2007-05-30. http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2007/05/30appletv.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-13.
  144. ^ Eran, Daniel (2007-03-27). "Ten Myths of the Apple TV: 5.1 Audio". Roughly Drafted Magazine. Roughly Drafted. http://www.roughlydrafted.com/RD/RDM.Tech.Q1.07/147048D8-D8B7-45E7-9A97-3CD5B4C2B75A.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  145. ^ "Get Dolby Digital output from Apple TV without hacking". Apple TV Source. 2007-04-16. http://appletvsource.com/content/view/64/1/. Retrieved on 2007-04-20.
  146. ^ "5.1 surround sound playback on Mac (and maybe Apple TV)". This Much I Know. 2007-01-15. http://www.thismuchiknow.co.uk/?p=24. Retrieved on 2007-07-22.
  147. ^ Eran, Daniel (2007-02-25). "Apple TV: iTunes Store Movie Quality vs DVD, HD, Cable". Roughly Drafted Magazine. http://www.roughlydrafted.com/RD/RDM.Tech.Q1.07/D1925D1E-7479-4F44-B3B7-472113B366D8.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-03.
  148. ^ "AC3 Passthrough success?". AwkwardTV.org. 2007-05-21. http://forum.awkwardtv.org/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=127. Retrieved on 2007-07-22.
  149. ^ Chartier, David (2007-03-29). "Apple TV: What you can't do". The Unofficial Apple Weblog. http://www.tuaw.com/2007/03/29/apple-tv-what-you-cant-do/. Retrieved on 2007-04-04.
  150. ^ Patterson, Ben (December 18, 2007). "Apple TV on Yahoo! Tech's Worst of 2007 list". Yahoo!. http://tech.yahoo.com/blogs/patterson/9908.
  151. ^ AppleInsider Staff (2007-01-17). "Apple TV tops best seller list at Apple Store". AppleInsider. http://www.appleinsider.com/articles/07/01/17/briefly_apple_tv_tops_best_seller_list_at_apple_store.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-18.
  152. ^ staff (2007-01-24). "Apple TV Blowing Away Expectations". Apple Recon. http://applerecon.com/2007/01/24/apple-tv-blowing-away-expectations/. Retrieved on 2007-07-18.
  153. ^ Martin, Scott (2007-02-20). "Apple TV: DVD Killer?". redherring.com. http://www.redherring.com/Home/21384. Retrieved on 2007-07-18.
  154. ^ Christ, Steve (2007-03-22). "Apple's Next Evolution". Wealth Daily. http://www.wealthdaily.com/articles/apple+tv-itunes-cable+tv/926. Retrieved on 2009-03-18.
  155. ^ Ogg, Erica (2007-03-21). "Best Buy finagles Apple TV exclusive". CNET. http://news.com.com/8301-10784_3-6169447-7.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-18.
  156. ^ Elmer-DeWitt, Philip (2007-04-20). "Target to Carry Apple TV; Early Sales Sluggish". business2.com. http://blogs.business2.com/apple/2007/04/target_to_carry.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-18.
  157. ^ Elmer-DeWitt, Philip (2007-04-30). "Apple TV On Sale at Costco for $289". business2.com. http://blogs.business2.com/apple/2007/04/apple_tv_on_sal.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-18.
  158. ^ Plesser, Andy (2007-05-24). "Apple TV Sales Will Stall at 1 Million". AlwaysOn. http://alwayson.goingon.com/permalink/post/14156. Retrieved on 2007-07-18.
  159. ^ Crum, Rex (2007-05-31). "Apple boosts analysts' hopes for Apple TV". MarketWatch. CBS. http://www.marketwatch.com/news/story/analysts-now-see-apple-tv/story.aspx?guid=%7B85872984-D593-455E-A994-7E706216B603%7D. Retrieved on 2007-07-18.
  160. ^ Wolverton, Troy (2007-06-15). "Bad Signals on Apple TV". MacNewsWorld. http://www.macnewsworld.com/story/57839.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-18.
  161. ^ McLean, Prince (2009-01-21). "Apple TV sales up threefold, will see continued investment". "RoughlyDrafted Magazine". http://www.roughlydrafted.com/2009/01/21/apple-tv-sales-up-threefold-will-see-continued-investment/. Retrieved on 2009-03-14.

## [edit] External links

  * Apple TV â official product site
  * Apple TV Support â official product support
  * Apple TV Complete Disassembly

v â¢ d â¢ e

Apple hardware since 1998  
Consumer computers

eMac Â· iMac (G3: Tray, Slot; G4; G5; Core; Core 2: Polycarbonate, Aluminum)
Â· Mac mini (G4; Core; Core 2)  
Professional computers

Mac Pro Â· Power Mac (G3: Outrigger, Minitower, AIO, B&W, Server; G4:
Graphite, Quicksilver, MDD, Server, Cube; G5) Â· Xserve (G4, CN; G5, CN;
Intel)  
Notebook computers

iBook (G3: Clamshell, Dual USB; G4) Â· MacBook (Core, Core 2: Polycarbonate,
Aluminum) Â· MacBook Air Â· MacBook Pro (Core, Core 2: Discrete, Unibody) Â·
PowerBook (2400c (Japan only), G3: Wallstreet, Lombard, Pismo; G4: Titanium,
Aluminum)  
Consumer electronics

Apple TV Â· Cinema Display Â· iPhone (EDGE, 3G) Â· iPod (Classic: 1G, 2G, 3G,
4G, Photo, 5G, 6G; Mini: 1G, 2G; iPod+HP; Shuffle: 1G, 2G, 3G; Nano: 1G, 2G,
3G, 4G; Touch: 1G, 2G)  
Accessories

AirPort (Card: B, G, N; Base Station: Graphite, Snow, Extreme G, Express G,
Extreme N, Express N) Â· iPod (Dock Connector, Camera Connector, iPod Hi-Fi,
Nike+iPod) Â· iSight Â· Keyboard (Pro, Wireless) Â· Mouse (Pro, Wireless,
Mighty Mouse) Â· Remote Â· Time Capsule Â· USB Modem Â· Xserve RAID  
Italics indicate discontinued products. See also: Apple hardware before 1998.  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Apple Inc.  
Board of directors

Bill Campbell Â· Millard Drexler Â· Al Gore Â· Steve Jobs Â· Andrea Jung Â·
Arthur D. Levinson Â· Eric E. Schmidt Â· Jerry York  
Hardware products

Apple TV Â· iPhone Â· iPod (Classic, Nano, Shuffle, Touch) Â· Mac (iMac,
MacBook (Air, MacBook, Pro), Mini, Pro, Xserve) Â· Former products  
Accessories

AirPort Â· Cinema Display Â· iPod accessories Â· Mighty Mouse Â· Time Capsule  
Software products

Aperture Â· Bento Â· FileMaker Pro Â· Final Cut Studio Â· iLife Â· iTunes Â·
iWork Â· Logic Studio Â· Mac OS X (iPhone, Server) Â· QuickTime Â· Safari Â·
Xsan  
Stores and services

ADC Â· AppleCare Â· Apple Specialist Â· Apple Store (online) Â· App Store Â·
Certifications Â· Genius Bar Â· iTunes Store Â· iWork.com Â· MobileMe Â· One
to One Â· ProCare  
Executives

Steve Jobs Â· Tim Cook Â· Peter Oppenheimer Â· Phil Schiller Â· Jonathan Ive
Â· Mark Papermaster Â· Ron Johnson Â· Sina Tamaddon Â· Bertrand Serlet Â·
Scott Forstall  
Acquisitions

Emagic Â· NeXT Â· Nothing Real Â· P.A. Semi Â· Silicon Color Â· Spruce
Technologies  
Related

Advertising (Get a Mac, iPods, Slogans) Â· Braeburn Capital Â· FileMaker Inc.
Â· History (Discontinued products, Litigation, Typography) Â· Portal  
Annual revenue: US$32.48 billion (â²35.3% FY 2008) Â· Employees: 32,000 full-
time; 3,100 temporary Â· Stock symbol: (NASDAQ: AAPL, LSE: ACP, FWB: APC) Â·
Web site: www.apple.com  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apple_TV"

Categories: 2007 introductions | Apple Inc. hardware | Digital media receivers
| Television technology | ITunes

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 20:36.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



