
# Criticism of Wikipedia

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The major points of criticism of Wikipedia are the claims that the principle
of being open for editing by everyone makes Wikipedia unauthoritative and
unreliable (see Reliability of Wikipedia), that it exhibits systemic bias, and
that its group dynamics hinder its goals.

Particularly noteworthy controversies about Wikipedia's content and editors
have attracted wide and unfavorable media attention. Critics have used the
Seigenthaler and Essjay incidents to call Wikipedia's reliability and
usefulness as a reference into question. Wikipedia has also been the subject
of parody and other humorous criticism.

## Contents

  * 1 Criticism of the content
    * 1.1 Accuracy of information
      * 1.1.1 Lack of authority
      * 1.1.2 Comparative study on scientific articles conducted by Nature
      * 1.1.3 Lack of fact checking on esoteric topics
      * 1.1.4 Neutral point of view and conflicts of interest
        * 1.1.4.1 Scientific disputes
        * 1.1.4.2 Exposure to political operatives and advocates
        * 1.1.4.3 Editing for financial rewards
        * 1.1.4.4 WikiScanner systematically exposes biased editors
        * 1.1.4.5 Conflicts involving policy makers
    * 1.2 Quality of the presentation
      * 1.2.1 "Waffling" prose, "antiquarianism" and quality of writing
      * 1.2.2 Wall Street Journal debate
    * 1.3 Systemic bias in coverage
      * 1.3.1 Notability of article topics
      * 1.3.2 Liberal bias
      * 1.3.3 U.S.-centric bias
    * 1.4 Sexual content
    * 1.5 Exposure to vandals
      * 1.5.1 Death by Wikipedia
    * 1.6 Privacy concerns
  * 2 Criticism of the community
    * 2.1 Jimmy Wales' role
    * 2.2 Selection of editors
      * 2.2.1 Anti-elitism as deterrent for experts
      * 2.2.2 Lack of credential verification and the Essjay controversy
    * 2.3 Anonymity of editors
    * 2.4 Editorial process
      * 2.4.1 Level of debate, edit wars, flame wars, and harassment
      * 2.4.2 Consensus and the "hive mind"
    * 2.5 Social stratification
  * 3 Impact on society
    * 3.1 Threat to traditional publishers
  * 4 Humorous criticism
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 Further reading
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Criticism of the content

Robert McHenry, a former editor-in-chief of the EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica, said
that Wikipedia errs in billing itself as an encyclopedia, because that word
implies a level of authority and accountability that he believes cannot be
possessed by an openly editable reference. McHenry argues that

â To the ordinary user, the turmoil and uncertainty that may lurk beneath
the surface of a Wikipedia article are invisible. He or she arrives at a
Wikipedia article via Google, perhaps, and sees that it is part of what claims
to be an "encyclopedia". This is a word that carries a powerful connotation of
reliability. The typical user doesn't know how conventional encyclopedias
achieve reliability, only that they do.[1] â  
Frequent Wikipedia critic Andrew Orlowski wrote on a December 2005 OpEd at The
Register:

â If what we today know as 'Wikipedia' had started life as something called,
let's say â'Jimbo's Big Bag O'Trivia'â we doubt if it would be the problem
it has become. Wikipedia is indeed, as its supporters claim, a phenomenal
source of pop culture trivia. Maybe a 'Big Bag O'Trivia' is all Jimbo [Jimmy
Wales] ever wanted. Maybe not.

For sure a libel is a libel, but the outrage would have been far more muted if
the Wikipedia project didn't make such grand claims for itself. The problem
with this vanity exercise is one that it's largely created for itself. The
public has a firm idea of what an 'encyclopedia' is, and it's a place where
information can generally be trusted, or at least slightly more trusted than
what a labyrinthine, mysterious bureaucracy can agree upon, and surely more
trustworthy than a piece of spontaneous graffitiâand Wikipedia is a king-
sized cocktail of the two.[2]

â  
A number of academics â such as Sarah Deutch, dean of social sciences and
professor of history at Duke University, and Margaret Humphries, professor of
history and associate clinical professor of medicine at Duke â have
criticized Wikipedia for its perceived failure as a reliable source.[3] A
related criticism is that many Wikipedia editors do not have degrees or other
credentials generally recognized in academia.[4] The use of Wikipedia is not
accepted in many schools and universities in writing a formal paper. Several
educational institutions have banned the use of Wikipedia as a primary source
in the past while others have limited its use to only a pointer to external
sources.[3] University of Maryland professor of physics Robert L. Park has
characterized Wikipedia as a target for "purveyors of pseudoscience."[5]

Some academic journals do refer to Wikipedia articles, but are not elevating
it to the same level as traditional references. For instance, Wikipedia
articles have been referenced in "enhanced perspectives" provided on-line in
the journal Science. The first of these perspectives to provide a hyperlink to
Wikipedia was "A White Collar Protein Senses Blue Light,"[6] and dozens of
enhanced perspectives have provided such links since then. The publisher of
Science states that these enhanced perspectives "include hypernotes - which
link directly to websites of other relevant information available online -
beyond the standard bibliographic references."[7]

Some librarians, academics, and editors of other encyclopedias consider it to
have little utility as a reference work.[3][8] Most university lecturers
discourage students from citing any encyclopedia in academic work.[9] One
university program and several schools have even banned Wikipedia citations
specifically.[10]

Wikipedia's policies state that assertions should be supported by reliable,
published sourcesâideally, by peer reviewed publications.[11] Jimmy Wales,
the de facto leader of Wikipedia,[12] stresses that encyclopedias of any type
are not usually appropriate as primary sources, and should not be relied upon
as authoritative.[13]

### [edit] Accuracy of information

For more details on this topic, see Reliability of Wikipedia#Accuracy of
articles.

#### [edit] Lack of authority

Wikipedia acknowledges that it should not be used as a primary source for
serious research.[14] Librarian Philip Bradley stated in an October 2004
interview with The Guardian that the concept behind the site was a "lovely
idea," but, "practically, I wouldn't use it; and I'm not aware of a single
librarian who would. The main problem is the lack of authority. With printed
publications, the publishers have to ensure that their data is reliable, as
their livelihood depends on it. But with something like this, all that goes
out the window."[15]

Robert McHenry, former editor-in-chief of EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica said in
November 2004:

â The user who visits Wikipedia to learn about some subject, to confirm some
matter of fact, is rather in the position of a visitor to a public restroom.
It may be obviously dirty, so that he knows to exercise great care, or it may
seem fairly clean, so that he may be lulled into a false sense of security.
What he certainly does not know is who has used the facilities before him.[8]
â  
Wikipedia contains no formal peer review process for fact-checking, and due to
the lack of requiring qualifications to edit any article, the contributors
themselves may not be well-versed in the topics they write about. As the
cultural commentator Paul Vallely put it, writing in The Independent on the
subject of Wikipedia:

â Using it is like asking questions of a bloke you met in the pub. He might
be a nuclear physicist. Or he might be a fruitcake.[16] â  
Due to lack of intrinsic authority, Wikipedia has been also criticized for
relying too much on citing sources, particularly in disputed articles, instead
of relying on expert authority for the credibility of its contents.[17]

#### [edit] Comparative study on scientific articles conducted by Nature

In December 2005 the journal Nature conducted a single-blind study comparing
the accuracy of a sample articles from Wikipedia and EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica.
The sample included 42 articles on scientific topics, including biographies of
well-known scientists. The articles were compared for accuracy by academic
reviewers that remained anonymous â a customary practice for journal article
reviews. Based on their review, the average Wikipedia article contained 4
errors or omissions; the average Britannica article, 3. The study
concluded:[18]

â

Jimmy Walesâ Wikipedia comes close to Britannica in terms of the accuracy of
its science entries, a Nature investigation finds.

â  
EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica's initial concerns led to Nature releasing further
documentation of its survey method.[19] Based on this additional information,
EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica denied the validity of the Nature study, claiming
that it was "fatally flawed" as the Britannica extracts were compilations that
sometimes included articles written for the youth version.[20] Nature
acknowledged the compiled nature of some of the Britannica extracts, but
disputed the claim that this invalidated the conclusions of the study.[21]
EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica also argued that the Nature study showed that while
the error rate between the two encyclopedias was similar, a breakdown of the
errors indicated that the mistakes in Wikipedia were more often the inclusion
of incorrect facts, while the mistakes in Britannica were "errors of
omission", claiming that

â

Britannica was far more accurate than Wikipedia according to the figures; the
journal simply misrepresented its own results.

â  
Nature has since rejected the Britannica response[22] and published a point-
by-point response to Britannica's specific objections about alleged
errors.[23]

#### [edit] Lack of fact checking on esoteric topics

Inaccurate information that is not obviously false may persist in Wikipedia
for a long time before it is challenged. The most prominent cases reported by
mainstream media involved biographies of living persons.

The Seigenthaler incident demonstrated that the subject of a biographical
article must sometimes fix blatant lies about his own life. In November 2005,
a user edited the biographical article on John Seigenthaler Sr. so that it
contained several false and defamatory statements.[24][25] The inaccurate
claims went unnoticed between May and September 2005 when they were discovered
by Victor S. Johnson, Jr., a friend of Seigenthaler. Wikipedia content is
often mirrored at sites such as Answers.com, which means that incorrect
information can be replicated alongside correct information through a number
of web sources. Such information can develop a misleading air of authority
because of its presence at such sites:[26]

â

Then [Siegenthaler's] son discovered that his father's hoax biography also
appeared on two other sites, Reference.com and Answers.com, which took direct
feeds from Wikipedia. It was out there for four months before Seigenthaler
realised and got the Wikipedia entry replaced with a more reliable account.
The lies remained for another three weeks on the mirror sites downstream.

â  
In another example, on March 2, 2007, msnbc.com reported that Hillary Rodham
Clinton had been incorrectly listed for 20 months in her Wikipedia biography
as valedictorian of her class of 1969 at Wellesley College. (Hillary Rodham
was not the valedictorian, though she did speak at commencement.)[27] The
article included a link to the Wikipedia edit,[28] where the incorrect
information was added on July 9, 2005. After the msnbc.com report, the
inaccurate information was removed the same day.[29] Between the two edits,
the wrong information had stayed in the Clinton article while it was edited
more than 4,800 times over 20 months.

Attempts to perpetrate hoaxes may not be confined to editing Wikipedia
articles. In October 2005 Alan Mcilwraith, a former call centre worker from
Scotland created a Wikipedia article in which he claimed to be a highly
decorated war hero. The article was quickly identified by other users as
unreliable (see Wikipedia Signpost article 17 April 2006). However, Mcilwraith
had also succeeded in convincing a number of charities and media organizations
that he was who he claimed to be:[30]

â

The 28-year-old, who calls himself Captain Sir Alan McIlwraith, KBE, DSO, MC,
has mixed with celebrities for at least one fundraising event.

But last night, an Army spokesman said: "I can confirm he is a fraud. He has
never been an officer, soldier or Army cadet."

â  
There have also been instances of users deliberately inserting false
information into Wikipedia in order to test the system and demonstrate its
alleged unreliability.[31] Television personality Stephen Colbert lampooned
this drawback of Wikipedia, calling it wikiality.

Wikipedia considers Vandalism the insertion of false and misleading
information in bad faith. The Wikipedia page Researching with Wikipedia
states:

â Wikipedia's radical openness means that any given article may be, at any
given moment, in a bad state: for example, it could be in the middle of a
large edit or it could have been recently vandalized. While blatant vandalism
is usually easily spotted and rapidly corrected, Wikipedia is certainly more
subject to subtle vandalism than a typical reference work.[14] â  
#### [edit] Neutral point of view and conflicts of interest

The concept of a neutral point of view (NPOV), which is regarded as a non-
negotiable principle of Wikipedia,[32] has itself been criticized as an
impossible ideal due to the inevitable biases of editors. In an interview with
Jimmy Wales and Wikipedia critic Robert Cox, NPR commentator Mark Glaser
stated:

â "I keep hearing from my readers (many of whom Iâm guessing are
Wikipedians or ex-Wikipedians) that attaining NPOV is impossible, that
everyone has bias and introduces it in some way... Can anyone write from an
NPOV? Doesnât everyone have inherent biases?"[33] â  
Other critics allege that NPOV privileges "mainstream points of view" and
imagines that they are neutral, when often mainstream points of view
legitimize existing power relations. These critics also argue that NPOV
accepts mainstream ideas about what is "radical" and "progressive," rather
than applying a consistent standard of critique and assessment to "mainstream"
and "progressive" contributions.[34][35]

##### [edit] Scientific disputes

The 2005 Nature[18] study also gave two brief examples of challenges that
scientific Wikipedians purportedly faced on Wikipedia. The first concerned the
initial addition of a section on violence to the schizophrenia article and
gave the view of one of the article's regular editors, neuropsychologist
Vaughan Bell, that it was little more than a "rant" about the need to lock
people up, and that editing it stimulated him to look up the literature on the
topic. The second dispute reported by Nature involved the climate researcher
William Connolley, who was opposed by anonymous editors (Nature considered
anonymous editors that did not use their real names[citation needed]). The
topic in this second dispute was climate change; Nature reported that this
dispute was far more protracted, and led to arbitration, which took three
months to produce a decision. The outcome of arbitration, as reported by
Nature, was a six-month parole for Connolley â during this time he was
restricted to one revert per day. Connolley's opponents were reportedly banned
from editing climate articles also for six months.

##### [edit] Exposure to political operatives and advocates

While Wikipedia policy requires articles to have a neutral point of view, it
is not immune from attempts by outsiders (or insiders) with an agenda to place
a spin on articles. In January 2006 it was revealed that several staffers of
members of the U.S. House of Representatives had embarked on a campaign to
cleanse their respective bosses' biographies on Wikipedia, as well as
inserting negative remarks on political opponents. References to a campaign
promise by Martin Meehan to surrender his seat in 2000 were deleted, and
negative comments were inserted into the articles on U.S. Senator Bill Frist
and Eric Cantor, a congressman from Virginia. Numerous other changes were made
from an IP address which is assigned to the House of Representatives.[36] In
an interview, Wikipedia de facto leader Jimmy Wales[12] remarked that the
changes were "not cool."[37] Some organizations are making efforts to correct
inaccuracies. For example, the Telegraph reported that a Boston-based media
watchdog asked supporters to help edit clearly anti-Israeli biases in
Wikipedia articles.[38]

Some articles dealing with Latin American history and groups (such as the
Sandinistas and Cuba) lack political neutrality and are written from a
sympathetic Marxist perspective which treats socialist dictatorships favorably
at the expense of alternate positions.[39] [40] ([41]+[42])

In April 2008, the Boston-based Committee for Accuracy in Middle East
Reporting in America (CAMERA) organized an e-mail campaign to correct
perceived Israel-related biases and inconsistencies in Wikipedia.[43] Excerpts
of some of the e-mails were published in the July 2008 issue of Harper's
Magazine under the title of "Candid camera".[44] CAMERA argued the excerpts
were unrepresentative and that it had campaigned "toward encouraging people to
learn about and edit the online encyclopedia for accuracy".[45] Five editors
involved in the campaign were sanctioned by Wikipedia administrators.[46]

On August 31 2008, The New York Times ran an article detailing the edits made
to the biography of Sarah Palin in the wake of her nomination as running mate
of John McCain. During the 24 hours before the McCain campaign announcement,
30 edits, many of them flattering details, were made to the article by
Wikipedia single-purpose user identity Young Trigg.[47] This person has later
acknowledged working on the McCain campaign, and having several Wikipedia user
accounts.[48]

Rush Limbaugh, an American conservative political commentator and radio
personality who has been familiar with Wikipedia since at least November
2005,[49][50][51][52] has called Wikipedia "liberal" on his radio show.[53]

##### [edit] Editing for financial rewards

In January 2007 Rick Jelliffe claimed in a story carried by CBS[54] and IDG
News Service [55][56] that Microsoft had offered him compensation in exchange
for his future editorial services on Wikipedia's articles related to OOXML
(Office Open Extensible Markup Language). A Microsoft spokesperson, quoted by
CBS, commented that "Microsoft and the writer, Rick Jelliffe, had not
determined a price and no money had changed hands - but they had agreed that
the company would not be allowed to review his writing before submission".
Also quoted by CBS, Jimmy Wales expressed his disapproval of Microsoft's
involvement: "We were very disappointed to hear that Microsoft was taking that
approach".

In a story covered by the BBC, former Novell chief scientist Jeffrey Merkey
claimed that in exchange for a donation his Wikipedia entry was edited in his
favor. Jay Walsh, a spokesman for Wikipedia, flatly denied the allegations in
an interview given to the Daily Telegraph.[57]

##### [edit] WikiScanner systematically exposes biased editors

In August 2007, a tool called WikiScanner developed by Virgil Griffith, a
visiting researcher from the Santa Fe Institute in New Mexico, was released to
match anonymous IP edits in the encyclopedia with an extensive database of
addresses.

News stories appeared about IP addresses from various organizations such as
the Central Intelligence Agency, the Democratic Congressional Campaign
Committee, Diebold, Inc. and the Australian government being used to make
edits to Wikipedia articles, sometimes of an opinionated or questionable
nature. Another story stated that an IP address from the BBC itself had been
used to vandalize the article on George W. Bush.[58]

The BBC quoted a Wikipedia spokesperson as praising the tool: "We really value
transparency and the scanner really takes this to another level. Wikipedia
Scanner may prevent an organisation or individuals from editing articles that
they're really not supposed to."[59] Not everyone hailed WikiScanner as a
success for Wikipedia. Oliver Kamm, in an article for The Times, argued
instead that:[60]

â

The WikiScanner is thus an important development in bringing down a pernicious
influence on our intellectual life. Critics of the web decry the medium as the
cult of the amateur. Wikipedia is worse than that; it is the province of the
covert lobby. The most constructive course is to stand on the sidelines and
jeer at its pretensions.

â  
##### [edit] Conflicts involving policy makers

In February 2008, British technology news and opinion website The Register
published an article called "Wikipedia ruled by 'Lord of the Universe' ", in
which it was pointed out that despite the fact that a prominent administrator
of Wikipedia, Jossi Fresco, declared a conflict of interest related to Prem
Rawat, the article alleged that not only did Fresco edit the article of Prem
Rawat to keep criticism to bare minimum, he altered the Wikipedia policies
over personal biography and policies regarding "conflict of interest", to
favour his alleged "biased" editing. The article pointed out that Fresco was
also involved in Wikipedia's "Conflict of Interest Noticeboard", the situation
which the Register article described as "a conflict of conflict of interest".
The article ended with the claim:[61]

â

Jossi Fresco may bear the most extreme conflict of interest in the history of
Wikipedia - and he edits the policy that governs conflict of interest.

â  
Some of the most scathing criticism of Wikipedia's claimed neutrality came in
The Register, which in turn was allegedly criticized by founding members of
the project. According to The Register:[62]

â

In short, Wikipedia is a cult. Or at least, the inner circle is a cult. We
aren't the first to make this observation.[63]

On the inside, they reinforce each other's beliefs. And if anyone on the
outside questions those beliefs, they circle the wagons. They deny the facts.
They attack the attacker. After our Jossi Fresco story, Fresco didn't refute
our reporting. He simply accused us of "yellow journalism". After our
Overstock.com article, Wales called us "trash".

â  
### [edit] Quality of the presentation

#### [edit] "Waffling" prose, "antiquarianism" and quality of writing

Roy Rosenzweig, in a June 2006 essay that combined both praise and criticism
of Wikipedia, had several criticisms of its prose and its failure to
distinguish the genuinely important from the merely sensational. He said that
Wikipedia is "surprisingly accurate in reporting names, dates, and events in
U.S. history" (Rosenzweig's own field of study) and that most of the few
factual errors that he found "were small and inconsequential" and that some of
them "simply repeat widely held but inaccurate beliefs," which are also
repeated in Encarta and the Britannica. However, he made one major criticism.

â Good historical writing requires not just factual accuracy but also a
command of the scholarly literature, persuasive analysis and interpretations,
and clear and engaging prose. By those measures, American National Biography
Online easily outdistances Wikipedia.[64] â  
Contrasting Wikipedia's treatment of Abraham Lincoln to that of Civil War
historian James McPherson in American National Biography Online, he said that
both were essentially accurate and covered the major episodes in Lincoln's
life, but praised "McPhersonâs richer contextualizationâ¦ his artful use of
quotations to capture Lincolnâs voice â¦ and â¦ his ability to convey a
profound message in a handful of words." By contrast, he gives an example of
Wikipedia's prose that he finds "both verbose and dull." Rosenzweig made a
further criticism, contrasting "the skill and confident judgment of a seasoned
historian" displayed by McPherson and others to the "antiquarianism" of
Wikipedia (which he compares in this respect to American Heritage magazine),
and said that while Wikipedia often provides extensive references, they are
not the best ones. [64]

Rosenzweig also criticized the "wafflingâencouraged by the npov
policyâ[which] means that it is hard to discern any overall interpretive
stance in Wikipedia history." By example, he quoted the conclusion of
Wikipedia's article on William Clarke Quantrill. While generally praising the
article, he pointed out its "waffling" conclusion: "Some historiansâ¦remember
him as an opportunistic, bloodthirsty outlaw, while others continue to view
him as a daring soldier and local folk hero."[64]

Other critics have made similar charges that, even if Wikipedia articles are
factually accurate, they are often written in a poor, almost unreadable style.
Frequent Wikipedia critic Andrew Orlowski commented: "Even when a Wikipedia
entry is 100 per cent factually correct, and those facts have been carefully
chosen, it all too often reads as if it has been translated from one language
to another then into to a third, passing an illiterate translator at each
stage."[65]

An article in The Times of London Jimmy Wales stood by the quality of the
presentation in Wikipedia:[60]

â

'I am unaware of any problems with the quality of discourse on the site,' he
said. 'I donât know of any higher-quality discourse anywhere.'

â  
#### [edit] Wall Street Journal debate

In the September 12, 2006 edition of the Wall Street Journal, Jimmy Wales
debated with Dale Hoiberg, editor-in-chief of Encyclopedia Britannica.[66]
Hoiberg focused on a need for expertise and control in an encyclopedia and
cited Lewis Mumford that overwhelming information could "bring about a state
of intellectual enervation and depletion hardly to be distinguished from
massive ignorance."

Wales emphasized Wikipedia's differences, and asserted that openness and
transparency lead to quality. Hoiberg claimed that he "had neither the time
nor space to respond to [criticisms]" and "could corral any number of links to
articles alleging errors in Wikipedia", to which Wales responded: "No problem!
Wikipedia to the rescue with a fine article", and included a link to the
Wikipedia article Criticism of Wikipedia.

### [edit] Systemic bias in coverage

Further information: Academic studies about Wikipedia#A minority of editors
produce the majority of persistent content

Wikipedia has been accused of systemic bias, which is to say, its general
nature leads without necessarily any conscious intention, to the propagation
of various prejudices. Although many articles in newspapers have concentrated
on minor, indeed trivial, factual errors in Wikipedia articles, there are also
concerns about large scale, presumably unintentional effects from the
increasing influence and use of Wikipedia as a research tool at all levels. In
an article in the Times Higher Education magazine (London)[67] the radical
philosopher Martin Cohen accused Wikipedia of having "become a monopoly" with
"all the prejudices and ignorance of its creators imposed too". Cohen cites
the examples of the Wikipedia entries on Maoism (which he implies is unfairly
characterised as simply the use of violence to impose political ends) and
Socrates who (on Wikipedia at least) is "Plato's teacher who left behind not
very many writings". This last, to readers of the Times Higher Education at
least, is patent nonsense, but illustrates the shallow knowledge base of
editors who then proceed to make sweeping judgements. There are many other
instances which have been discussed both within and outside Wikipedia of the
supposed Western and Eurocentric bias of the website, such as the assertion
that 'philosophy' as an activity is essentially a European invention and
discovery. Cohen accuses Wikipedia's editors of having a 'youthful cab-
drivers' perspective, by which he means they are strongly opinionated and lack
the tools of serious researchers to adopt a more objective standpoint.

Another example of claimed systemic bias is the tendency to cover topics in a
detail disproportionate to their importance. As an example, Stephen Colbert
once mock-praised Wikipedia for having a "longer entry on 'lightsabers' than
it does on the 'printing press.' " In an interview with The Guardian, Dale
Hoiberg, the editor-in-chief of EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica, noted:[15]

â People write of things they're interested in, and so many subjects don't
get covered; and news events get covered in great detail. In the past, the
entry on Hurricane Frances was more than five times the length of that on
Chinese art, and the entry on Coronation Street was twice as long as the
article on Tony Blair. â  
This flaw has been the subject of a game known as "Wikigroaning", a term
coined by Jon "DocEvil" Hendren[68] of the website Something Awful.[69] In the
game, two articles (preferably with similar names) are compared: one about a
serious subject and the other about a topic important only to a select group
of fans.[70] Critics of Wikipedia concede that the encyclopedia's coverage of
pop culture does not impose space constraints on the coverage of more
"serious" subjects, as spelled out in the "Wiki is not paper" article. As Ivor
Tossell noted:

â That Wikipedia is chock full of useless arcana (and did you know, by the
way, that the article on "Debate" is shorter than the piece that weighs the
relative merits of the 1978 and 2003 versions of Battlestar Galactica?) isn't
a knock against it: Since it can grow infinitely, the silly articles aren't
depriving the serious ones of space.[71] â  
#### [edit] Notability of article topics

Wikipedia's notability guidelines (de facto policies), and the application
thereof, is the subject of much criticism.

Nicholson Baker considers the notability standards arbitrary and essentially
unsolvable:[72]

â

There are quires, reams, bales of controversy over what constitutes notability
in Wikipedia: nobody will ever sort it out.

â  
Criticizing the "deletionists", Nicholson Baker then writes:[72]

â Still, a lot of good workâverifiable, informative, brain-leapingly
strangeâis being cast out of this paperless, infinitely expandable accordion
folder by people who have a narrow, almost grade-schoolish notion of what sort
of curiosity an on-line encyclopedia will be able to satisfy in the years to
come.

[...] It's harder to improve something that's already written, or to write
something altogether new, especially now that so many of the World
Bookâsanctioned encyclopedic fruits are long plucked. There are some people
on Wikipedia now who are just bullies, who take pleasure in wrecking and
mocking peoples' workâeven to the point of laughing at nonstandard
"Engrish." They poke articles full of warnings and citation-needed notes and
deletion prods till the topics go away.

â  
Complaining that his own biography was on the verge of deletion for lack of
notability, Timothy Noah argued that:[73]

â

Wikipedia's notability policy resembles U.S. immigration policy before 9/11:
stringent rules, spotty enforcement. To be notable, a Wikipedia topic must be
"the subject of multiple, non-trivial published works from sources that are
reliable and independent of the subject and of each other." Although I have
written or been quoted in such works, I can't say I've ever been the subject
of any. And wouldn't you know, some notability cop cruised past my bio and
pulled me over. Unless I get notable in a hurryâwin the Nobel Peace Prize?
Prove I sired Anna Nicole Smith's baby daughter?âa "sysop" (volunteer
techie) will wipe my Wikipedia page clean. It's straight out of Philip K.
Dick.

â  
In the same article, Noah mentions that the Pulitzer Prize-winning writer
Stacy Schiff was not considered notable enough for a Wikipedia entry before
she wrote an extensive New Yorker article on Wikipedia itself.

#### [edit] Liberal bias

Another criticism is that a politically liberal bias is predominant. According
to Jimmy Wales: "The Wikipedia community is very diverse, from liberal to
conservative to libertarian and beyond. If averages mattered, and due to the
nature of the wiki software (no voting) they almost certainly donât, I would
say that the Wikipedia community is slightly more liberal than the U.S.
population on average, because we are global and the international community
of English speakers is slightly more liberal than the U.S. population. There
are no data or surveys to back that."[74] The belief in a liberal bias at
Wikipedia led to the creation of Conservapedia,[75] whose editors have
compiled a list of alleged examples of bias in Wikipedia.[76] In 2007, an
article in The Christian Post criticised Wikipedia's coverage of Intelligent
design, saying that it was biased and hypocritical.[77] Lawrence Solomon of
the National Review considered the Wikipedia articles on subjects like global
warming, intelligent design, and Roe v. Wade all to be slanted in favor of
liberal views.[78] The American Renaissance asserted that Wikipedia has a
strong liberal bias in racial topics.[79]

#### [edit] U.S.-centric bias

Tim Anderson, a senior lecturer in political economy at the University of
Sydney, claimed that Wikipedia administrators display a U.S.-centric bias in
their interaction with editors, and in their determination of sources that are
appropriate for use on the site. Anderson was outraged after several of the
sources he used in his edits to Hugo Chavez, including Venezuela Analysis and
Z Magazine, were disallowed as "unusable". Anderson also described Wikipedia's
Neutral point of view policy to ZDNet Australia as "a facade", and that
Wikipedia "hides behind a reliance on corporate media editorials".[80]

### [edit] Sexual content

Wikipedia has also been criticized for allowing graphic sexual content such as
images and videos of masturbation and ejaculation as well as photos from
hardcore pornographic films found on its articles. Child protection
campaigners say graphic sexual content appears on many Wikipedia entries,
displayed without any warning or age verification.[81]

### [edit] Exposure to vandals

Note: this section considers vandalism in the Merriam-Webster dictionary sense
of the word. Wikipedia itself labels as vandalism a wider range of behaviors.

Wikipedia has a range of tools available to users and administrators in order
to combat vandalism. Supporters of the project argue that the vast majority of
vandalism on Wikipedia is reverted within a short time, and a study by
Fernanda ViÃ©gas of the MIT Media Lab and Martin Wattenberg and Kushal Dave of
IBM Research found that most vandal edits were reverted within around five
minutes.[82] While most instances of page blanking or the addition of
offensive material are soon reverted, less obvious vandalism has remained for
longer periods. For example, a user made several racist edits to Martin Luther
King, Jr. Day that were not reverted for nearly four hours.[83] Columnist
Sujay Kumar commented:

â

While Wikipedia says that most vandal edits are removed within five minutes,
some falsities have managed to go unnoticed. An outlandishly fake entry about
Larry King's uncontrollable flatulence was posted for a month.[84]

â  
A peer-reviewed study[85] that measured the actual number of page views with
"damaged" content, concluded:

â

42% of damage is repaired almost immediately, i.e., before it can confuse,
offend, or mislead anyone. Nonetheless, there are still hundreds of millions
of damaged views.

â  
#### [edit] Death by Wikipedia

Death by Wikipedia is a phenomenon noted in media,[86][87][88][89] where a
person is erroneously proclaimed dead through vandalism. Celebrities such as
Steve Jobs, Ted Kennedy, Donald Knuth or Robert Byrd have been proclaimed
dead. Usually, the reports are quickly removed from the site, but sometimes
they arouse great controversy in the media at large.

### [edit] Privacy concerns

Most privacy concerns refer to cases of government or employer data gathering;
or to computer or electronic monitoring; or to trading data between
organizations.[90]. "The Internet has created conflicts between personal
privacy, commercial interests and the interests of society at large" warn
James Donnelly and Jenifer Haeckl.[91] Balancing the rights of all concerned
as technology alters the social landscape will not be easy. It "is not yet
possible to anticipate the path of the common law or governmental regulation"
regarding this problem.[91]

The concern in the case of Wikipedia is the right of a private citizen to
remain private; to remain a "private citizen" rather than a "public figure" in
the eyes of the law.[92] It is somewhat of a battle between the right to be
anonymous in cyberspace and the right to be anonymous in real life
("meatspace"). Wikipedia Watch argues that "Wikipedia is a potential menace to
anyone who values privacy" and that "a greater degree of accountability in the
Wikipedia structure" would be "the very first step toward resolving the
privacy problem."[93]

A particular problem occurs in the case of an individual who is relatively
unimportant and for whom there exists a Wikipedia page against their wishes.

In January 2006, a German court ordered the German Wikipedia shut down within
Germany due to it stating the full name of Boris Floricic, aka "Tron", a
deceased hacker who was formerly with the Chaos Computer Club. More
specifically, the court ordered that the URL within the German `.de` domain
(`http://www.wikipedia.de/`) may no longer redirect to the encyclopedia's
servers in Florida at `http://de.wikipedia.org`although German readers were
still able to use the US-based URL directly, and there was virtually no loss
of access on their part. The court order arose out of a lawsuit filed by
Floricic's parents, demanding that their son's surname be removed from
Wikipedia.[94] On February 9, 2006, the injunction against Wikimedia
Deutschland was overturned, with the court rejecting the notion that Tron's
right to privacy or that of his parents were being violated.[95] The
plaintiffs appealed to the Berlin state court, but were refused relief in May
2006.

## [edit] Criticism of the community

The Wikipedia community (people who contribute to Wikipedia) is also subject
to various criticisms. Emigh and Herring argue that "a few active users, when
acting in concert with established norms within an open editing system, can
achieve ultimate control over the content produced within the system,
literally erasing diversity, controversy, and inconsistency, and homogenizing
contributors' voices."[96] The community has also been criticized for
responding to complaints regarding an article's quality by advising the
complainer to fix the article themselves.[97] Professor James H. Fetzer
criticized Wikipedia in that he could not change the article about
himself;[98] to ensure impartiality, Wikipedia has a policy that discourages
the editing of biographies by the subjects themselves except in "clear-cut
cases", such as reverting vandalism or correcting out-of-date or mistaken
facts.[99]

The community has been described as "cult-like,"[100][101][102] although not
always with entirely negative connotations.[103] A popular joke is that
Wikipedia cannot possibly work in theory, but does work in practice.[104] A
larger social community also helps in maintaining a supportive atmosphere and
collective etiquette, such as resolving disputes by appealing to reliable
sources and Wikipedia's own policies.[105][not in citation given]

Wikipedia does not require that its users identify themselves. This anonymity
has been criticized, since it does not allow editors to be held accountable
for their edits.[citation needed] It also means that multiple people may use
one accountâor, more often, one person may use multiple accounts, often in
an attempt to influence an argument. The latter practice is known as "sock
puppetry," which is actively discouraged on Wikipedia.[106]

### [edit] Jimmy Wales' role

The community of Wikipedia editors has been criticized for placing an
irrational emphasis on Jimmy Wales as a person, with phrases such as "What
Would Jimbo Do?". Wales' role in personally determining the content of some
articles has also been criticized as contrary to the independent spirit that
Wikipedia supposedly has.[107][108]

### [edit] Selection of editors

Stacy Schiff notes in her editorial about Wikipedia that[109]

â

Wikipedia is an online community devoted not to last nightâs party or to
next seasonâs iPod but to a higher good. It is also no more immune to human
nature than any other utopian project. Pettiness, idiocy, and vulgarity are
regular features of the site. Nothing about high-minded collaboration
guarantees accuracy, and open editing invites abuse.

â  
#### [edit] Anti-elitism as deterrent for experts

Co-founder of Wikipedia, and former editor-in-chief of Nupedia, Larry
Sanger,[110] stated in an opinion piece in Kuro5hin that "anti-
elitism"âactive contempt for expertiseâwas rampant among Wikipedia editors
and supporters. He further stated that "far too much credence and respect [is]
accorded to people who in other Internet contexts would be labelled
'trolls'."[111] The sort of sentiment Sanger describes is more commonly known
as anti-intellectualism.

In 2006 Nature covered the launch of Citizendum, and noted in the
editorial:[112]

â

Many scientists would like to help make sure this resource remains accurate,
but they have no desire to navigate the treacherous waters of Wikipedia's
editorial system, which accords them no official role.

â  
#### [edit] Lack of credential verification and the Essjay controversy

Main article: Essjay controversy

In July 2006 The New Yorker ran a feature about Wikipedia by Stacy
Schiff.[109] The initial version of the article included an interview with a
Wikipedia administrator known by the pseudonym Essjay, who was described as a
tenured professor of theology.[113] Essjay's Wikipedia user page[114] (now
removed) made the following claim:

â

I am a tenured professor of theology at a private university in the eastern
United States; I teach both undergraduate and graduate theology. I have been
asked repeatedly to reveal the name of the institution, however, I decline to
do so; I am unsure of the consequences of such an action, and believe it to be
in my best interests to remain anonymous.

â  
Essjay also claimed on his user page that he held four academic degrees:
Bachelor of Arts in Religious Studies (B.A.), Master of Arts in Religion
(M.A.R.), Doctorate of Philosophy in Theology (Ph.D.), and Doctorate in Canon
Law (JCD). Essjay specialized in editing articles about religion on Wikipedia,
including subjects such as "the penitential rite, transubstantiation, the
papal tiara";[109] on one occasion he was called in to give some "expert
testimony" on the status of Mary in the Roman Catholic Church.[115] In January
2007, Essjay was hired as a manager with Wikia, a wiki-hosting service founded
by Wales and Angela Beesley. In February, Wales appointed Essjay as a member
of the Wikipedia Arbitration Committee, a group with powers to issue binding
rulings in disputes relating to Wikipedia.[116]

In late February 2007 The New Yorker added an editorial note to its article on
Wikipedia stating that it had learned that Essjay was Ryan Jordan, a 24-year-
old college dropout from Kentucky with no advanced degrees and no teaching
experience.[117] Initially Jimmy Wales commented on the issue of Essjay's
identity: "I regard it as a pseudonym and I donât really have a problem with
it." Larry Sanger, co-founder[118][119][120] of Wikipedia, responded to Wales
on his Citizendium blog by calling Wales' initial reaction "utterly
breathtaking, and ultimately tragic." Sanger said the controversy "reflects
directly on the judgment and values of the management of Wikipedia."[121]

Wales later issued a new statement saying he had not previously understood
that "EssJay used his false credentials in content disputes." He added: "I
have asked EssJay to resign his positions of trust within the [Wikipedia]
community."[122] Sanger responded the next day: "It seems Jimmy finds nothing
wrong, nothing trust-violating, with the act itself of openly and falsely
touting many advanced degrees on Wikipedia. But there most obviously is
something wrong with it, and itâs just as disturbing for Wikipediaâs head
to fail to see anything wrong with it."[123]

On March 4, Essjay wrote on his user page that he was leaving Wikipedia, and
he also resigned his position with Wikia.[124] A subsequent article in The
Courier-Journal (Louisville) suggested that the new rÃ©sumÃ© he had posted at
his Wikia page was exaggerated.[125] The March 19, 2007 issue of The New
Yorker published a formal apology by Wales to the magazine and Stacy Schiff
for Essjay's false statements.[126]

Discussing the incident, the New York Times noted that the Wikipedia community
had responded to the affair with "the fury of the crowd," and observed:

â

The Essjay episode underlines some of the perils of collaborative efforts like
Wikipedia that rely on many contributors acting in good faith, often
anonymously and through self-designated user names. But it also shows how the
transparency of the Wikipedia processâall editing of entries is marked and
savedâallows readers to react to suspected fraud.[127]

â  
The Essjay incident received extensive media coverage, including a national
U.S. television broadcast on ABC's World News with Charles Gibson[128] and a
March 7, 2007 Associated Press story that was picked up by more than 100 media
outlets listed in the Google news cache.[129] The controversy has led to a
proposal that users claiming to possess academic qualifications would have to
provide evidence before citing them in Wikipedia content disputes.[130] The
proposal was not accepted.[131]

### [edit] Anonymity of editors

See also: On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog

Wikipedia co-founder[110] Larry Sanger wrote:[132]

â Widespread anonymity leads to a distinguishable problem, namely, the
attractiveness of the project to people who merely want to cause trouble, or
who want to undermine the project, or who want to change it into something
that it is avowedly not â in other words, the troll problem. â  
But more importantly, allowing anonymous editing generally induces a lack of
authority, accountability, and healthy (or at least civil) interaction:[133]

â ... Wikipedia's anonymity reduces the accountability that stimulates
healthy exchanges. ... "When you put everybody in a system that is flat, where
everybody can say yes or no, without any sense of authority, what you get is
tribalism," ... "What has gone into the article creation is very often the
result of this dysfunctional system. It presents itself with this aura of
authority, whereas what goes on behind the scenes is anything but." â  
On many occasions, open (anonymous) editing is the source of many problems:
Pettiness, idiocy, vulgarity, lack of accuracy, abuse (complete
quotation).[109]

A February 2008 article in SF Weekly details a journalist's futile attempts to
track down the real identity of Wikipedia user Griot, who got involved in edit
wars over the biography of Ralph Nader as well local politicians, and was
eventually banned on Wikipedia for sock puppeteering. The article draws the
distinction between the press and Wikipedia:[134]

â

Say what you will about the press: There is at least a measure of
accountability in a newspaper that is rarely seen on Wikipedia. It's called a
byline. I mean, I'm sure I've produced some less-than-brilliant work during
the dozen or so years I've been a journalist. But at least I've had the guts
to sign my name â my real name â to what I write.

â  
The article also quotes Paul Grabowicz, the new-media program director for the
University of California at Berkeley Graduate School of Journalism:

â

"I guess I have the same feeling about Wikipedia and other citizen-generated
sites [as I have] about the media: The more transparency the better" [...]
"People should be able to find out who is producing the information."

â  
Wikipedia itself considers editors anonymous in a much narrower sense of the
word than the citations above, namely only those editors that do not have a
registered account, and use an auto-generated IP-labeled account, are
considered anonymous. To disambiguate the two notions on anonymity, in the
remainder of this section we use the term unregistered for the narrower
Wikipedia meaning.

Since unregistered editors reveal their IP addresses, which can be used by
admins to register complaints with Internet service providers or to put "range
blocks" in place. Admins may also choose not to block because they might
exclude regular contributors who share the same IP. Knowledgeable computer
users and hackers, though, are easily capable of finding ways around IP
blocking. Many have suggested requiring users to register before editing
articles, and on December 5, 2005 non-registered editors were prohibited from
creating new articles.[135] This does not address the larger problem of
anonymity however.

### [edit] Editorial process

Further information: Academic studies about Wikipedia#Power plays

#### [edit] Level of debate, edit wars, flame wars, and harassment

The standard of debate on Wikipedia has been called into question by persons
who have noted that contributors can make a long list of salient points and
pull in a wide range of empirical observations to back up their arguments,
only to have them ignored completely on the site.[63] An academic study of
Wikipedia articles found that the level of debate among Wikipedia editors on
controversial topics often degenerated into counterproductive squabbling: "For
uncontroversial, 'stable' topics self-selection also ensures that members of
editorial groups are substantially well-aligned with each other in their
interests, backgrounds, and overall understanding of the topics...For
controversial topics, on the other hand, self-selection may produce a strongly
misaligned editorial group. It can lead to conflicts among the editorial group
members, continuous edit wars, and may require the use of formal work
coordination and control mechanisms. These may include intervention by
administrators who enact dispute review and mediation processes, [or]
completely disallow or limit and coordinate the types and sources of
edits."[136]

Another complaint about Wikipedia focuses on the efforts of contributors with
idiosyncratic beliefs, who push their point of view in an effort to dominate
articles, especially controversial ones.[137][138] This sometimes results in
revert wars and pages being locked down. In response, an Arbitration Committee
has been formed on the English Wikipedia that deals with the worst alleged
offendersâthough a conflict resolution strategy is actively encouraged
before going to this extent. Also, to stop the continuous reverting of pages,
Jimmy Wales introduced a "three-revert rule",[139] whereby those users who
reverse the effect of others' contributions to one article more than three
times in a 24-hour period may be blocked.

Another edit war reported in mainstream press happened soon after the death of
Kenneth Lay, the disgraced former CEO of Enron, who died due to a heart
attack. Several editors to the encyclopedia added content to Lay's Wikipedia
biography surmising that the death was in fact a suicide, well in advance of
any official determination of cause of death. Such edits were reverted and re-
inserted several times; eventually the article reported the cause of death as
a heart attack. As of July 2007, there is no evidence to suggest that Lay's
death was by other than natural causes. The edit history of the article was
investigated by the press, and the Washington Post published a column on the
subject.[140]

A SF Weekly article[134] commented on the stakes of edit wars:

â

Many an edit war may seem like a fight over nothing to the casual observer,
but considering that according to its staff, the popular, multilingual Web
site gets about 7 billion views per month, stakes can be high. An edit yields
what millions of people read on the site on any particular topic.

â  
A common complaint about Wikipedia concerns so-called "flame wars", or
deliberate insults made by users to create a hostile environment. This concern
has been acknowledged by Wikipedia; civility[141] and "no personal
attacks"[142] are official policies of the project, and the concept of
"wikiquette" has been adopted by some users in response.[143]

In an article in The Brooklyn Rail, former Wikipedia contributor David
Shankbone contended that he had been harassed and stalked because of his work
on Wikipedia, had received no support from the authorities or the Wikimedia
Foundation, and only mixed support from the Wikipedia community. Shankbone
wrote that "If you become a target on Wikipedia, do not expect a supportive
community."[144]

#### [edit] Consensus and the "hive mind"

See also: Conformity and Groupthink

Oliver Kamm, in an article for The Times, expressed skepticism toward
Wikipedia's reliance on consensus in forming its content:[60]

â

Wikipedia seeks not truth but consensus, and like an interminable political
meeting the end result will be dominated by the loudest and most persistent
voices.

â  
In his article, Digital Maoism: The Hazards of the New Online Collectivism
(first published online by Edge: The Third Culture, 30 May 2006), computer
scientist and digital theorist Jaron Lanier describes Wikipedia as a "hive
mind" that is "for the most part stupid and boring," and asks, rhetorically,
"why pay attention to it?" His thesis follows:

â

The problem is in the way the Wikipedia has come to be regarded and used; how
it's been elevated to such importance so quickly. And that is part of the
larger pattern of the appeal of a new online collectivism that is nothing less
than a resurgence of the idea that the collective is all-wise, that it is
desirable to have influence concentrated in a bottleneck that can channel the
collective with the most verity and force. This is different from
representative democracy, or meritocracy. This idea has had dreadful
consequences when thrust upon us from the extreme Right or the extreme Left in
various historical periods. The fact that it's now being re-introduced today
by prominent technologists and futurists, people who in many cases I know and
like, doesn't make it any less dangerous.[145]

â  
Lanier goes on to point out the economic trend to reward entities that
aggregate information, rather than those that actually generate content. In
the absence of "new business models," the popular demand for content will be
sated by mediocrity, thus reducing or even eliminating any monetary incentives
for the production of new knowledge.[145]

Lanier's opinions produced some strong disagreement. Internet consultant Clay
Shirky noted that Wikipedia has many internal controls in place and is not a
mere mass of unintelligent collective effort:

â Neither proponents nor detractors of hive mind rhetoric have much
interesting to say about Wikipedia itself, because both groups ignore the
details... Wikipedia is best viewed as an engaged community that uses a large
and growing number of regulatory mechanisms to manage a huge set of proposed
edits... To take the specific case of Wikipedia, the Seigenthaler/Kennedy
debacle catalyzed both soul-searching and new controls to address the problems
exposed, and the controls included, inter alia, a greater focus on individual
responsibility, the very factor âDigital Maoismâ denies is at work.[146]
â  
However, critics charge that unless one is both familiar with Wikipedia and
willing to spend a certain amount of time on Wikipedia these safeguards can
and do fail.[citation needed]

In a 2005 study, Emigh and Herring note that there are not yet many formal
studies of Wikipedia or its model, and suggest that Wikipedia achieves its
results by social meansâself-norming, a core of active users watching for
problems, and expectations of encyclopedic text drawn from the wider
culture.[96]

### [edit] Social stratification

Further information: Academic studies about Wikipedia#Work distribution and
social strata

An article in Computer Power User asserted that former editors of Wikipedia
formed Wikitruth, a site that exposes alleged censorship and infighting on the
encyclopedia.[147] Jimmy Wales dismissed the site as a "hoax" created by
editors who had their articles deleted or modified on Wikipedia.[148]

In an article on Wikipedia conflicts, The Guardian noted criticism that
administrators of the site, who have "special powers to lock down vulnerable
articles from further editing, and temporarily block problem users from making
changes to the site",[149] sometimes abuse those powers to suppress legitimate
editors. The article discussed "a backlash among some editors, who argue that
blocking users compromises the supposedly open nature of the project, and the
imbalance of power between users and administrators may even be a reason some
users choose to vandalise in the first place."[149]

â

'My vandalism started after an edit conflict over the Courier-Journal's sports
and editorial coverage, where my - what I felt were - legitimate edits on the
page for C-J criticism were removed and I was blasted,' he says. 'I have being
vandalising Wikipedia and its user pages for months, mostly because seeing my
vandalism or that of others was funny as hell... and to punish admins.

â  
An article on The Register, dated 4 December 2007 and entitled "Secret mailing
list rocks Wikipedia", alleged the use of a private mailing list to coordinate
administrative actions.[150] A follow-up article on 8 December 2007
specifically alleged that administrators were collaborating with critics of
Overstock.com to "own" articles about the company.[151]

## [edit] Impact on society

In 2008 the Scottish Parent Teacher Council blamed Wikipedia for Scotland's
falling exam pass rates. [152]

### [edit] Threat to traditional publishers

Some observers claim that Wikipedia is undesirable, because it is an economic
threat to publishers of traditional encyclopedias, many of whom may be unable
to compete with a product which is essentially free. Nicholas Carr writes in
the essay "The amorality of Web 2.0," speaking of the so-called Web 2.0 as a
whole: "Implicit in the ecstatic visions of Web 2.0 is the hegemony of the
amateur. I for one can't imagine anything more frightening."[153] Others
dispute the notion that Wikipedia, or similar efforts, will entirely displace
traditional publications. For instance, Chris Anderson, the editor-in-chief of
Wired Magazine, wrote in Nature that the "wisdom of the crowds" approach of
Wikipedia will not displace top scientific journals with their rigorous peer
review process.[154]

In 2005, staff at the EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica said it did not feel threatened
by Wikipedia. "The premise of Wikipedia is that continuous improvement will
lead to perfection; that premise is completely unproven," the reference work's
executive editor, Ted Pappas, told The Guardian.[155]

## [edit] Humorous criticism

<IMG>

<IMG>

Satirical image of Wikipedia's topic distribution.

Wikipedia has been satirized by humorists who call attention to factual
inaccuracies that may appear in articles owing to sloppy or biased editors or
vandalism. For example, an article in The Onion was entitled "Wikipedia
Celebrates 750 Years Of American Independence"[156] In a piece on The Colbert
Report, entitled "Wikiality" (a portmanteau of "wiki" and "reality"), Stephen
Colbert encouraged his viewers to change Wikipedia's article on elephants to
state that the number of African elephants had tripled over the past six
months.[157] Colbert's comments provoked a wave of vandalism of various
articles at Wikipedia.[158] On the January 29, 2007 edition of his program,
Colbert did another segment on an attempt by Microsoft[54][55][56] to hire
writers to skew certain Wikipedia articles in their favor, ending with a call
by Colbert to change the Wikipedia article on "truth" to the phrase "Truth has
become a commodity" and offering a $5 cash reward to the first viewer to do
so. In the animated American Dad! episode "Black Mystery Month" the character
Steve Smith, seeking the âone place where a person can put out crazy
information with no evidence that millions will accept as true,â turns to
Wikipedia.[159] Mad Magazine has spoofed Wikipedia several times in a section
of "short takes" on topics of current interest.

An article in The Sun derided Wikipedia for including a list of "List of big-
bust models and performers". Pretending to quote an unnamed "company source",
the article concluded: "Itâs every computer geekâs dream come true --
definitely one of Wikipediaâs breast, I mean best, assets".[160]

In an editorial by Games Radar columnist Charlie Barrat, Wikipedia's coverage
of video game-related topics is juxtaposed with topics that have (ostensibly)
greater real-world significance, such as God, World War II and former U.S.
presidents. The volumous material that in many cases exists regarding the
former when compared with the latter is the subject of the criticism and
satire.[161]

Satire also exists in the form of parody encyclopedias such as
Uncyclopedia[162] and Encyclopedia Dramatica.[163]

## [edit] See also

  * Deletionism and inclusionism in Wikipedia
  * History of Wikipedia
  * Reliability of Wikipedia
  * User-generated content
  * Wikipedia Review and Wikitruth, two web sites dedicated to criticizing Wikipedia and its leadership.
  * Wikipedia:Press coverage

## [edit] References

  1. ^ McHenry, Robert (2005-12-14). "The Faith-Based Encyclopedia Blinks". TCS Daily. http://www.tcsdaily.com/article.aspx?id=111504A. Retrieved on 2008-10-12.
  2. ^ Andrew Orlowski (2005-12-12). "Who's responsible for Wikipedia?". The Register. http://www.theregister.co.uk/2005/12/12/wikipedia_no_responsibility/page2.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-27.
  3. ^ a b c Lysa Chen (2007-03-28). "Several colleges push to ban Wikipedia as resource". Duke Chronicle. http://media.www.dukechronicle.com/media/storage/paper884/news/2007/03/28/News/Several.Colleges.Push.To.Ban.Wikipedia.As.Resource-2809247.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-04-02.
  4. ^ Youngwood, Susan (April 1, 2007). "Wikipedia: What do they know; when do they know it, and when can we trust it?". Vermont Sunday Magazine (Rutland Herald). http://vermonttoday.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20070401/FEATURES/70330002. Retrieved on 2007-04-05. "Perhaps the most important thing to understand about Wikipedia - both its genius and its Achilles heel - is that anyone can create or modify an entry. Anyone means your 10-year-old neighbor or a Nobel Prize winner - or an editor like me, who is itching to correct a grammar error in that Wikipedia entry that I just quoted. Entries can be edited by numerous people and be in constant flux. What you read now might change in five minutes. Five seconds, even." â Susan Youngwood.
  5. ^ Bob Park (2007-03-23). "Wikipedia: Has a beautiful idea fallen victim to human nature?". What's New By Bob Park. http://bobpark.physics.umd.edu/WN07/wn032307.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-02.
  6. ^ Linden, Hartmut (2002-08-02). "A White Collar Protein Senses Blue Light". Science. http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/summary/297/5582/777. Retrieved on 2005. (subscription access only)
  7. ^ Yolanda S. George and Shirley S. Malcolm. "Perspectives from AAAS" (PDF). American Association for the Advancement of Science. http://www.aaas.org/publications/books_reports/CCLI/PDFs/01_D_Perspectives.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-27.
  8. ^ a b McHenry, Robert (2004-11-15). "The Faith-Based Encyclopedia". Tech Central Station. http://www.tcsdaily.com/article.aspx?id=111504A. Retrieved on 2008-10-12.
  9. ^ Noam Cohen (2007-02-27). "Wikipedia on an academic hit list". NY Times News Service. http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/editorials/archives/2007/02/27/2003350261. Retrieved on 2007-04-16. "Middlebury professor Thomas Beyer, of the Russian department, said: 'I guess I am not terribly impressed by anyone citing an encyclopedia as a reference point, but I am not against using it as a starting point.'"
  10. ^ "A Stand Against Wikipedia", Inside Higher Ed (January 26, 2007). Retrieved on January 27, 2007.
  11. ^ "Wikipedia: Verifiability". http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Verifiability.
  12. ^ a b Brian Bergstein (2007-04-02). "Wikipedia co-founder seeks to start all over againâthis time with contributors' real names". Associated Press. http://www.post-gazette.com/pg/07092/772696-96.stm. Retrieved on 2007-04-21. "Wikipedia's de-facto leader, Jimmy Wales, counters that real names are overrated." Sorin Adam Matei and Caius Dobrescu. "Ambiguity and conflict in the Wikipedian knowledge production system". 2006 International Communication Association Annual Meeting, Dresden, Germany. http://www.matei.org/ithink/papers/ambiguity-conflict-wikipedia/. Retrieved on 2007-04-26. "The participants included several notable contributors, such as James Wales, Wikipediaâs founder and de facto arbiter and leader of the project." Holden Frith (2007-03-26). "Wikipedia founder launches rival online encyclopaedia". The Times. http://technology.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/tech_and_web/the_web/article1571519.ece. Retrieved on 2007-04-26. "Wikipediaâs de facto leader, Jimmy Wales, stood by the site's format."
  13. ^ Wikipedia: "A Work in Progress", BusinessWeek (December 14, 2005). Retrieved on 2007-01-29.
  14. ^ a b "Wikipedia:Researching with Wikipedia". Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Researching_with_Wikipedia. Retrieved on 2005-12-14.
  15. ^ a b Waldman, Simon (2004-10-26). "Who knows?". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2004/oct/26/g2.onlinesupplement. Retrieved on 2005-12-30.
  16. ^ Vallely, Paul (2006-10-18). "The Big Question: Do we need a more reliable online encyclopedia than Wikipedia?". The Independent. http://news.independent.co.uk/world/science_technology/article1886601.ece. Retrieved on 2006-10-18.
  17. ^ Larry Sanger (2007-03-21). "We arenât Wikipedia". Citizendium Blog. http://blog.citizendium.org/2007/03/21/we-arent-wikipedia/. Retrieved on 2007-04-29. "Since weâve got expert editors on board, we can take a more sensible approach to citing sources. The editors we have on board create the sort of sources that Wikipedia cites. We do cite sources, of course, but we have a sensible approach to doing so. We cite sources because doing so helps the reader. We do not cite sources in order to settle internal disputes, or to âproveâ a point to contributors; as seasoned researchers, we know that you can find sources for all sorts of ridiculous claims."
  18. ^ a b Jim Giles (2005-12-15). "Internet encyclopaedias go head to head". Nature 438: 900-901. doi:10.1038/438900a.
  19. ^ "Supplementary information to accompany Nature news article "Internet encyclopedias go head to head"". Nature. 2005-12-22. http://www.nature.com/news/2005/051212/exref/supplementary_information.doc.
  20. ^ "Fatally Flawed" (PDF). EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica. March 2006. http://corporate.britannica.com/britannica_nature_response.pdf. Retrieved on 14 July 2007.
  21. ^ "Britannica attacks". Nature 440: 582. 2006-03-30. doi:10.1038/440582b. http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v440/n7084/full/440582b.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-14.
  22. ^ "Wikipedia study 'fatally flawed'". BBC News. 2006-03-24. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/4840340.stm.
  23. ^ "EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica and Nature: a response" (PDF). Press release (Nature). 2006-03-23. http://www.nature.com/nature/britannica/eb_advert_response_final.pdf.
  24. ^ John Siegenthaler (2005-11-29). "A false Wikipedia "biography"". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/news/opinion/editorials/2005-11-29-wikipedia-edit_x.htm.
  25. ^ Katharine Q. Seelye (Dec. 3, 2005) "Snared in the Web of a Wikipedia Liar" The New York Times
  26. ^ "Mistakes and hoaxes on-line". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 2006-04-15. http://www.abc.net.au/rn/science/ss/stories/s1613571.htm. Retrieved on 2007-04-28.
  27. ^ Dedman, Bill (2007-03-03). "Reading Hillary Clinton's hidden thesis". msnbc.com. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/17388372/page/3/. Retrieved on 2007-03-17.
  28. ^ "Hillary Rodham Clinton". Wikipedia. 2005-07-09. http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hillary_Rodham_Clinton&diff=18494301&oldid=18493966. Retrieved on 2007-03-17.
  29. ^ "Hillary Rodham Clinton". Wikipedia. 2007-03-02. http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hillary_Rodham_Clinton&diff=112070224&oldid=111773323. Retrieved on 2007-03-17.
  30. ^ Cara Paige (2006-04-11). "Exclusive: Meet the Real Sir Walter Mitty". Daily Record. http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/tm_objectid=16929538&method=full&siteid=66633&headline=meet-sir-walter-mitty--name_page.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-24.
  31. ^ Gene Weingarten (2007-03-16). "A wickedly fun test of Wikipedia". The News & Observer. http://www.newsobserver.com/105/story/553968.html. Retrieved on 2006-04-08.
  32. ^ "Wikipedia: Neutral point of view". http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WP:NPOV.
  33. ^ Mark Glaser (2006-04-21). "Wales Discusses Political Bias on Wikipedia". NPR. http://www.pbs.org/mediashift/2006/04/email_debatewales_discusses_po.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-27.
  34. ^ "Wikipedia:Neutral point of view/FAQ". Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Neutral_point_of_view/FAQ. Retrieved on 2006-09-13.
  35. ^ Mark Glaser (2006-04-17). "Is There a Neutral View on George W. Bush?". PBS. http://www.pbs.org/mediashift/2006/04/wikipedia_biasis_there_a_neutr.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-27. "The search for a âneutral point of viewâ mirrors the efforts of journalists to be objective, to show both sides without taking sides and remaining unbiased. But maybe this is impossible and unattainable, and perhaps misguided. Because if you open it up for anyone to edit, youâre asking for anything but neutrality."
  36. ^ Margaret Kane (2006-01-30). "Politicians notice Wikipedia". Cnet news.com. http://news.com.com/2061-11199_3-6032713.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-28.
  37. ^ "Senator staffers spam Wikipedia". http://lawnorder.blogspot.com/2006/01/senator-staffers-spam-wikipedia.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-13.
  38. ^ "Israeli battles rage on Wikipedia". http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/1934857/Israeli-battles-rage-on-Wikipedia.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-08.
  39. ^ Pablo Bachelet (2006-05-03). "War of Words: Website Can't Define Cuba". Miami Herald. http://nl.newsbank.com/nl-search/we/Archives?p_product=MH&p_theme=mh&p_action=search&p_maxdocs=200&s_dispstring=cuba%20wikipedia%20AND%20date(all)&p_field_advanced-0=&p_text_advanced-0=(cuba%20wikipedia)&p_sort=_rank_:D&xcal_ranksort=4&xcal_useweights=yes. Retrieved on 2008-07-08.
  40. ^ Matt Sanchez (2008-05-14). "Wiki-Whacked by Political Bias". Pajamas Media. http://pajamasmedia.com/blog/wiki-whacked-by-political-bias/. Retrieved on 2008-07-08.
  41. ^ Larry Delay (2006-08-03). "A Pernicious Model for Control of the World Wide Web: The Cuba Case" (PDF). Association for Study of the Cuban Economy(ASCE). http://lanic.utexas.edu/project/asce/pdfs/volume16/pdfs/program.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-07-08.
  42. ^ Larry Delay (2006-07-27). "A Pernicious Model for Control of the World Wide Web: The Cuba Case". Larry Daley (complete text of ASCE presentation on author's blog). http://draftarticlesldaley.blogspot.com/2006/07/pernicious-model-for-control-of-world.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-08.
  43. ^ Metz, Cade, "US Department of Justice banned from Wikipedia, The Register, April 29, 2008.
  44. ^ "Candid camera". Harper's Magazine. 2008-07. http://harpers.org/archive/2008/07/0082086/.
  45. ^ CAMERA: CAMERA Letter in Harper's Magazine About Wikipedia Issues
  46. ^ McElroy, Damien (2008-05-08). "Israeli battles rage on Wikipedia". The Daily Telegraph. Telegraph Media Group Limited. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/1934857/Israeli-battles-rage-on-Wikipedia.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-08.
  47. ^ Noam Cohen (August 31, 2008) "Donât Like Palinâs Wikipedia Story? Change It" Technology. The New York Times.
  48. ^ "Sarah Palins Wikipedia entry glossed over by mystery user hrs. before VP announcement", Thaindian News (September 2, 2008)
  49. ^ "History of Scandals from 1979 to 2005". Transcript. Official website of Rush Limbaugh. November 29, 2005. http://www.rushlimbaugh.com/home/eibessential/partisan_dems/history_of_scandals_.guest.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-09.
  50. ^ "Facts, Science Smash the Global Warming Myth". Transcript. Official website of Rush Limbaugh. February 28, 2007. http://www.rushlimbaugh.com/home/daily/site_022807/content/01125102.guest.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-09.
  51. ^ "Global Warming Update". Transcript. Official website of Rush Limbaugh. April 25, 2007. http://www.rushlimbaugh.com/home/daily/site_042507/content/01125116.guest.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-09.
  52. ^ "Drive-Bys Rev Up Racism Charge". Transcript. Official website of Rush Limbaugh. September 19, 2008. http://www.rushlimbaugh.com/home/daily/site_091908/content/01125112.guest.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-09.
  53. ^ "This Election Looks Like 1976". Transcript. Official website of Rush Limbaugh. October 3, 2008. http://www.rushlimbaugh.com/home/daily/site_100608/content/01125113.html.guest.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-09.
  54. ^ a b Brian Bergstein (Jan. 24, 2007) Microsoft Violates Wikipedia's Sacred Rule The Associated Press. Retrieved on 2008-09-03.
  55. ^ a b Nancy Gohring (Jan 23, 2007) "Microsoft said to offer payment for Wikipedia edits" IDG News Service. Retrieved on 2008-09-03.
  56. ^ a b Nancy Gohring (Jan 24, 2007) "Microsoft's step into Wikipedia prompts debate" IDG News Service.
  57. ^ March 12, 2008 Wiki boss 'edited for donation' Technology. BBC News.
  58. ^ Rhys Blakely (2007-08-15). "Exposed: guess who has been polishing their Wikipedia entries?". Times Online. http://business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/business/industry_sectors/media/article2264150.ece?token=null&offset=12. Retrieved on 2007-08-15.
  59. ^ Jonathan Fildes (2007-08-15). "Wikipedia 'shows CIA page edits'". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/6947532.stm. Retrieved on 2007-08-15.
  60. ^ a b c Wisdom? More like dumbness of the crowds | Oliver Kamm - Times Online
  61. ^ Metz, Cade, "Wikipedia ruled by 'Lord of the Universe'", The Register, February 6, 2008.
  62. ^ Cade Metz (March 6, 2008). "Why you should care that Jimmy Wales ignores reality". The Register. Retrieved on 2008-09-03.
  63. ^ a b Arthur, Charles (2005-12-15). "Log on and join in, but beware the web cults". http://technology.guardian.co.uk/online/insideit/story/0,,1667345,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-14.
  64. ^ a b c Roy Rosenzweig (June 2006). "Can History be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the Past". The Journal of American History 93 (1): 117â146. http://chnm.gmu.edu/resources/essays/d/42. Retrieved on 2006-08-11. (Center for History and New Media)
  65. ^ Andrew Orlowski (2005-10-18). "Wikipedia founder admits to serious quality problems". The Register. http://www.theregister.co.uk/2005/10/18/wikipedia_quality_problem/page2.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-30.
  66. ^ "The Wall Street Journal Online". http://online.wsj.com/public/article/SB115756239753455284-A4hdSU1xZOC9Y9PFhJZV16jFlLM_20070911.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-13.
  67. ^ Times Higher Education 28 August 2008 p26
  68. ^ Brophy-Warren, Jamin. "Oh, that John Locke". Wall Street Journal (June 16, 2007): P3. http://online.wsj.com/article_email/SB118194482542637175-lMyQjAxMDE3ODExNzkxNDc0Wj.html.
  69. ^ Hendren, Johnny "DocEvil" (2007-06-05). "The Art of Wikigroaning". Something Awful. http://www.somethingawful.com/d/news/wikigroaning.php. Retrieved on 2007-06-17.
  70. ^ Brown, Andrew. "No amount of collaboration will make the sun orbit the Earth". The Guardian (June 14, 2007). http://technology.guardian.co.uk/weekly/story/0,,2101810,00.html.
  71. ^ Ivor Tossell (2007-06-15). "Duality of Wikipedia". Toronto Globe and Mail. http://www.theglobeandmail.com/servlet/story/RTGAM.20070615.wweb15/BNStory/Technology/home. Retrieved on 2007-06-20.
  72. ^ a b Volume 55, Nicholson Baker (March 20, 2008) The Charms of Wikipedia - The New York Review of Books Vol. 55, Number 4.
  73. ^ Evicted from Wikipedia. - By Timothy Noah - Slate Magazine
  74. ^ Mark Glaser (2006-04-21). "Wales Discusses Political Bias on Wikipedia". PBS Mediashift. http://www.pbs.org/mediashift/2006/04/email_debatewales_discusses_po.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-21.
  75. ^ Johnson, Bobbie (2007-03-01). "Conservapediaâthe US religious right's answer to Wikipedia". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/international/story/0,,2024434,00.html.
  76. ^ Turner, Adam (2007-03-05). "Conservapedia aims to set Wikipedia right". IT Wire. http://www.itwire.com/content/view/10160/1154/. Retrieved on 2008-05-12.
  77. ^ Doug Huntington (2007-05-09). "'Design' Proponents Accuse Wikipedia of Bias, Hypocrisy". The Christian Post. http://www.christianpost.com/article/20070509/27307_'Design'_Proponents_Accuse_Wikipedia_of_Bias,_Hypocrisy.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-09.
  78. ^ Solomon, Lawrence (2008-07-08). "Wikipropaganda On Global Warming". National Review. CBSNews.com. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2008/07/08/opinion/main4241293.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-20.
  79. ^ Nicholas Stix: Wikipedia on Race - âWorldâs biggest encylopediaâ serves up propaganda. American Renaissance. July 2007
  80. ^ Marcus Browne (February 13, 2008) Wikipedia accused of 'US-centric bias' ZDNet Australia
  81. ^ Wikipedia attacked over porn pages
  82. ^ Fernanda ViÃ©gas, Martin Wattenberg, Kushal Dave (PDF). Studying Cooperation and Conflict between Authors with history flow Visualizations. MIT. http://alumni.media.mit.edu/~fviegas/papers/history_flow.pdf.
  83. ^ "Martin Luther King Day". Wikipedia. 2006-05-22. http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Martin_Luther_King_Day&oldid=54585762.
  84. ^ Sujay Kumar (2007-04-13). "Oh, the wonderful world of Wikipedia". The Daily Illini. http://media.www.dailyillini.com/media/storage/paper736/news/2007/04/13/OpinionColumns/Oh.The.Wonderful.World.Of.Wikipedia-2839245.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-10-04.
  85. ^ Reid Priedhorsky, Jilin Chen, Shyong (Tony) K. Lam, Katherine Panciera, Loren Terveen, John Riedl, "Creating, destroying, and restoring value in wikipedia", Proc. GROUP 2007, doi: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1316624.1316663
  86. ^ http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/07/08/AR2006070800135.html
  87. ^ http://www.theregister.co.uk/2009/01/22/wikipedia_vandalism_crackdown/
  88. ^ http://www.techradar.com/news/internet/vernon-kay-shocked-at-death-by-wikipedia-464838
  89. ^ http://voices.washingtonpost.com/capitol-briefing/2009/01/kennedy_the_latest_victim_of_w.html?hpid=topnews
  90. ^ See "Legal Issues in Employee Privacy" by Thamer E. "Chip" Temple III for further discussion
  91. ^ a b James Donnelly and Jenifer Haeckl (2001-04-12). "Privacy and Security on the Internet: What Rights, What Remedies?". MCLE. http://www.modl.com/images/library/114.html.
  92. ^ See "Libel" by David McHam for the legal distinction
  93. ^ Wikipedia's Hive Mind Administration
  94. ^ "Tron dispute". Wikipedia Signpost. Wikipedia. 2006-01-16. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Wikipedia_Signpost/2006-01-16/Tron_dispute.
  95. ^ Heise Online: "Court overturns temporary restraining order against Wikimedia Deutschland, by Torsten Kleinz, 9 February 2006.
  96. ^ a b Emigh & Herring (2005) "Collaborative Authoring on the Web: A Genre Analysis of Online Encyclopedias", Proceedings of the Thirty-Eighth Hawai'i International Conference on System Sciences. (PDF)
  97. ^ Andrew Orlowski, "Wiki-fiddlers defend Clever Big Book", The Register, July 23, 2004.
  98. ^ Professor James Fetzer Exposes Wikipedia.org
  99. ^ ""Wikipedia:Autobiography". Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Autobiography. Retrieved on 2007-05-03.
  100. ^ Arthur, Charles (2005-12-15). "Log on and join in, but beware the web cults". The Guardian. http://technology.guardian.co.uk/opinion/story/0,16541,1667346,00.html.
  101. ^ Thompson, Bill (2005-12-16). "What is it with Wikipedia?". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/4534712.stm.
  102. ^ Orlowski, Andrew (2005-12-06). "Who owns your Wikipedia bio?". The Register. http://www.theregister.co.uk/2005/12/06/wikipedia_bio/.
  103. ^ Lu Stout, Kristie (2003-08-04). "Wikipedia: The know-it-all Web site". CNN. http://www.cnn.com/2003/TECH/internet/08/03/wikipedia/index.html.
  104. ^ PBS' MediaShift, hosted by Mark Glaser, 14 April 2006, accessed on 2007-01-30
  105. ^ "Wikipedia:Research with Wikipedia," Wikipedia (March 28, 2005).
  106. ^ "Wikipedia:Sockpuppetry", Wikipedia. Retrieved on 2007-01-27.
  107. ^ Wikipedia isn't about human potential, whatever Wales says. The Guardian. Published September 25, 2008.
  108. ^ Why you should care that Jimmy Wales ignores reality. The Register. Published March 6, 2008.
  109. ^ a b c d Schiff, Stacey. "Know it all: Can Wikipedia conquer expertise?", The New Yorker, July 24, 2006.
  110. ^ a b Glyn Moody (2006-07-13). "This time, it'll be a Wikipedia written by experts". The Guardian. http://technology.guardian.co.uk/weekly/story/0,,1818630,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-28. "Larry Sanger seems to have a thing about free online encyclopedias. Although his main claim to fame is as the co-founder, along with Jimmy Wales, of Wikipedia, that is just one of several projects to produce large-scale, systematic stores of human knowledge he has been involved in..."[Jimmy Wales] saw that I was essentially looking for employment online and he was looking for someone to lead Nupedia"...Career: 1992-1996, 1997-1998 Graduate teaching associate, OSU; 2000-2002 Editor-in-chief, Nupedia."
  111. ^ Sanger, Larry (2004-12-30). "Why Wikipedia Must Jettison Its Anti-Elitism". Kuro5hin. http://www.kuro5hin.org/story/2004/12/30/142458/25. Retrieved on 2006-07-14.
  112. ^ Jim Giles (2006). "Wikipedia rival calls in the experts". Nature 443. http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v443/n7111/full/443493a.html.
  113. ^ Finkelstein, Seth (March 8, 2007). "Read me first". Technology. The Guardian. http://technology.guardian.co.uk/weekly/story/0,,2028328,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-01. At some point, Essjay claimed he had sent a letter to a real-life college professor using his invented persona's credentials, vouching for Wikipedia's accuracy. In the letter he wrote in part, "It is never the case that known incorrect information is allowed to remain in Wikipedia."
  114. ^ "Archived copy of Essjay's Wikipedia user page". The Internet Archive. http://web.archive.org/web/20060111060701/http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Essjay.
  115. ^ "Talk:Five solas". Wikipedia. 2005-06-11. http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Talk:Five_solas&diff=prev&oldid=15002257. Retrieved on 2007-06-18.
  116. ^ Orlowski, Andrew (March 2, 2007). "Bogus Wikipedia Prof. was blessed then promoted". Music and Media. The Register. http://www.theregister.co.uk/2007/03/02/wikipedia_fraud/. Retrieved on 2007-03-18.
  117. ^ Staff (2007-03-06). "Fake professor in Wikipedia storm". BBC. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/6423659.stm. Retrieved on 2007-03-08.
  118. ^ Bergstein, Brian (March 25, 2007). "Sanger says he co-started Wikipedia". ABC News (Associated Press). http://abcnews.go.com/Technology/wireStory?id=2980046. Retrieved on 2007-03-26. "The nascent Web encyclopedia Citizendium springs from Larry Sanger, a philosophy Ph.D. who counts himself as a co-founder of Wikipedia, the site he now hopes to usurp. The claim doesn't seem particularly controversialâSanger has long been cited as a co-founder. Yet the other founder, Jimmy Wales, isn't happy about it."
  119. ^ "Fact-Driven? Collegial? This Site Wants You". New York Times. 2001-09-20. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9800E5D6123BF933A1575AC0A9679C8B63&n=Top%2fReference%2fTimes%20Topics%2fSubjects%2fC%2fComputer%20Software. Retrieved on 2007-08-01. "I can start an article that will consist of one paragraph, and then a real expert will come along and add three paragraphs and clean up my one paragraph," said Larry Sanger of Las Vegas, who founded Wikipedia with Mr. Wales.
  120. ^ David Mehegan (February 12, 2006). "Bias, sabotage haunt Wikipedia's free world". Boston Globe. http://www.boston.com/business/technology/articles/2006/02/12/bias_sabotage_haunt_wikipedias_free_world/?page=4. Retrieved on 2007-07-30.
  121. ^ Larry Sanger (1 March 2007). "Wikipedia firmly supports your right to identity fraud". Citizendium Blog. Larry Sanger. http://blog.citizendium.org/2007/03/01/wikipedia-firmly-supports-your-right-to-identity-fraud/. Retrieved on 2007-03-02.
  122. ^ "User talk:Jimbo Wales". http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=User_talk:Jimbo_Wales&oldid=112270687.
  123. ^ Larry Sanger (3 March 2007). "Jimmy Walesâ latest response on the Essjay situation". Citizendium Blog. Larry Sanger. http://blog.citizendium.org/2007/03/03/jimmy-wales-latest-response-on-the-essjay-situation/. Retrieved on 2007-03-03.
  124. ^ "Essjay's Wikia user page". http://www.wikia.com/wiki/User:Essjay. Retrieved on 2007-09-19.
  125. ^ Wolfson, Andrew (March 6, 2007). "Wikipedia editor who posed as professor is Ky. dropout: Man resigns post after controversy". Louisville Courier-Journal. Archived from the original on 2007-05-17. http://www.kctcs.net/todaysnews/index.cfm?tn_date=2007-03-06#9315. Retrieved on 2007-03-07.
  126. ^ Wales, Jimmy (2007-03-19), "Making amends", The New Yorker: 24 .
  127. ^ Cohen, Noam (2007-03-05). "A Contributor to Wikipedia Has His Fictional Side". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/03/05/technology/05wikipedia.html?pagewanted=1&ei=5090&en=f79cc41f899c2de6&ex=1330750800&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss. Retrieved on 2007-03-05.
  128. ^ "ABC News broadcast on Essjay". http://abcnews.go.com/Video/playerIndex?id=2929512. Retrieved on 2007-03-08.
  129. ^ Bergstein, Brian (March 7, 2007). "After flap over phony professor, Wikipedia wants some writers to share real names". Associated Press. http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/2007-03-07-wikipedia-credentials_N.htm.
  130. ^ Williams, Martyn (2007-03-09). "Wikipedia Founder Addresses User Credentials". IDG News Service. http://www.pcworld.com/article/id,129702-c,webservices/article.html.
  131. ^ Wikipedia Credentials
  132. ^ "Toward a New Compendium of Knowledge (longer version)". Citizendium.org. http://www.citizendium.org/essay.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-10.
  133. ^ B. Bergstein, Citizendium aims to be better Wikipedia, USA Today, Posted 3/25/2007 3:00 PM.
  134. ^ a b Mary Spicuzza (February 13, 2008) Wikipedia Idiots: The Edit Wars of San Francisco SF Weekly
  135. ^ Wales, Jimmy (2005-12-05). "WikiEN-l Experiment on new pages". http://mail.wikipedia.org/pipermail/wikien-l/2005-December/033880.html. Retrieved on 2005-12-30.
  136. ^ Besiki Stvilla, Michael Twidale, Linda Smith, Les Gasser. "Information Quality Work Organization in Wikipedia" (PDF). Florida State University. http://mailer.fsu.edu/~bstvilia/papers/stvilia_wikipedia_infoWork_p.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-05.
  137. ^ Martin Hickman and Genevieve Roberts (2006-02-13). "Wikipedia - separating fact from fiction". New Zealand Herald. http://www.nzherald.co.nz/category/story.cfm?c_id=55&objectid=10368068. Retrieved on 2007-04-17. "Such checking leads to a daily battle of wits with the cyber-wreckers who insert erroneous, ludicrous and offensive material into entries. How frequently entries get messed about with depends on the controversy of their subjects. This week the entry Muslim is being attacked dozens of times a day following the row about cartoons of Mohammed with angry denunciations of suicide bombing and claims of hypocrisy. Prime Minister Tony Blair's entry is a favourite for distortion with new statements casting aspersions on his integrity."
  138. ^ Kleinz, Torsten (February 2005). "World of Knowledge" (PDF). The Wikipedia Project (Linux Magazine). http://www.linux-magazine.com/issue/51/Wikipedia_Encyclopedia.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-05-12. "The Wikipedia's open structure makes it a target for trolls and vandals who malevolently add incorrect information to articles, get other people tied up in endless discussions, and generally do everything to draw attention to themselves."
  139. ^ "Wikipedia: Three revert rule". http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:3RR.
  140. ^ Frank Ahrens (2006-07-09). "Death by Wikipedia: The Kenneth Lay Chronicles". http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/07/08/AR2006070800135_pf.html/.
  141. ^ "Wikipedia: Civility". http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WP:CIVIL.
  142. ^ "Wikipedia: No personal attacks". http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WP:NPA.
  143. ^ Anja Ebersbach, Markus Glaser and Richard Heigl. "Wiki: Web Collaboration, Chapter One: "The Wiki Concept", p. 28-29" (PDF). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006 ISBN 978-3-540-25995-4. http://www.springerlink.com/content/h074pg176l3k3120/fulltext.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-01-28.
  144. ^ Shankbone, David (June 2008). "Nobody's safe in cyberspace". The Brooklyn Rail. http://www.brooklynrail.org/2008/06/express/nobodys-safe-in-cyber-space. Retrieved on 2008-07-10.
  145. ^ a b Lanier, Jaron (May 30, 2006). "DIGITAL MAOISM: The Hazards of the New Online Collectivism". Edge Foundation. http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/lanier06/lanier06_index.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-30.
  146. ^ Clay Shirky (2006-06-07). "Reactions to Digital Maoism". Many2Many. http://many.corante.com/archives/2006/06/07/reactions_to_digital_maoism.php. Retrieved on 2007-05-01.
  147. ^ Steve Smith (July 2006). "When The Wiki Hits The Fan". Computer Power User. http://www.computerpoweruser.com/editorial/article.asp?article=articles%2Farchive%2Fc0607%2F46c07%2F46c07.asp. Retrieved on 2007-10-27.
  148. ^ Antone Gonsalves (2006-04-17). "Wikipedia Protest Site 'A Hoax' - Founder". InformationWeek. http://www.informationweek.com/hardware/personaltech/185303404. Retrieved on 2007-10-27.
  149. ^ a b Jenny Kleeman (2007-03-25). "Wiki wars". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2007/mar/25/wikipedia.web20. Retrieved on 2007-10-04.
  150. ^ Cade Metz (2007-12-04). "Secret mailing list rocks Wikipedia". The Register. http://www.theregister.co.uk/2007/12/04/wikipedia_secret_mailing/. Retrieved on 2007-12-04.
  151. ^ "Wikipedia black helicopters circle Utah's Traverse Mountain". The Register. 2007-12-08. http://www.theregister.co.uk/2007/12/06/wikipedia_and_overstock/. Retrieved on 2008-05-02.
  152. ^ Falling exam passes blamed on Wikipedia 'littered with inaccuracies' - Scotsman.com News
  153. ^ "The amorality of Web 2.0". Rough Type. 2005-10-03. http://www.roughtype.com/archives/2005/10/the_amorality_o.php. Retrieved on 2006-07-15.
  154. ^ "Technical solutions: Wisdom of the crowds". Nature. http://www.nature.com/nature/peerreview/debate/nature04992.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-10.
  155. ^ Naughton, John (2005-01-09). "Why encyclopaedic row speaks volumes about the old guard". The Guardian. http://observer.guardian.co.uk/business/story/0,,1386027,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-15.
  156. ^ "Wikipedia Celebrates 750 Years Of American Independence"
  157. ^ Caroline McCarthy (2006-08-01). "Colbert speaks, America follows: All Hail Wikiality!". c-net news.com. http://news.com.com/2061-10802_3-6100754.html.
  158. ^ "Wikipedia satire leads to vandalism, protections". Wikipedia Signpost. 2006-08-07. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Wikipedia_Signpost/2006-08-07/Wikiality.
  159. ^ "Fox Broadcasting Company recaps: American Dad - Episode 13: Black Mystery Month". 2007-02-18. http://www.fox.com/americandad/recaps/index.htm. Retrieved on March 8, 2007
  160. ^ Katie Cheeseman (12 Dec., 2007) "Wikipedia's bust idea ever" The Sun
  161. ^ Charlie Barratt (June 25, 2008). "The WTF World of Wikipedia". Future Publishing. pp. 1â5. http://www.gamesradar.com/pc/f/the-wtf-world-of-wikipedia/a-2008062510326553058. Retrieved on February 20, 2009.
  162. ^ "Freedom of Speech through Wikipedia". U.S. Department of State. 2006-05-19. http://usinfo.state.gov/usinfo/USINFO/Products/Webchats/wales_19_may_2006.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-04.
  163. ^ Jonathan Dee (2007-07-01). "Wikipedia". New York Times Magazine. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/07/01/magazine/01WIKIPEDIA-t.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-19.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Andrew Keen. The Cult of the Amateur. Doubleday/Currency, 2007. ISBN 9780385520805 (substantial criticisms of Wikipedia and other web 2.0 projects). Listen to: Does the Internet Undermine Culture?, NPR interview with A. Keen, Weekend Edition Saturday, June 16, 2007.
  * Sheizaf Rafaeli & Yaron Ariel (2008). Online motivational factors: Incentives for participation and contribution in Wikipedia. In A. Barak (Ed.), Psychological aspects of cyberspace: Theory, research, applications (pp. 243â267). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.[1]

## [edit] External links

  * This article incorporates text from the GFDL Wikipedia page Wikipedia:Replies to common objections.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Wikipedia  
Main articles

History Â· Wikimedia Foundation Â· Wikimania Â· MediaWiki Â· Reliability Â·
Criticism Â· Deletionism and inclusionism Â· Academic studies about Wikipedia
Â· In culture Â· WikiScanner  
People

Jimmy Wales Â· Larry Sanger Â· Florence Devouard Â· Angela Beesley Starling Â·
Sue Gardner Â· Erik MÃ¶ller Â· Michael Snow  
Events

Blocking of Wikipedia in mainland China Â· Congressional staffer edits to
Wikipedia Â· Essjay controversy Â· Seigenthaler incident Â· Chris Benoit
double murder and suicide Â· Henryk Batuta hoax Â· Internet Watch Foundation
and Wikipedia Â· Truth in Numbers: The Wikipedia Story  
Related projects

Bomis Â· Nupedia Â· Citizendium Â· Enciclopedia Libre Universal en EspaÃ±ol Â·
Deletionpedia Â· Interpedia Â· MyWikiBiz Â· Veropedia Â· Wikia Â· Wikipedia
Review Â· Wikitruth Â· WikiZnanie Â· WikiPilipinas  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Criticism_of_Wikipedia"

Categories: Wikipedia as a media topic | Critics of Wikipedia | Criticisms of
companies

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since April 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements
since September 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008
| Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * FranÃ§ais
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 23:57 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



