
# The Sopranos

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The Sopranos  
<IMG>  
Promotional art from the second season depicting the main cast  
Genre Drama  
Created by David Chase  
Starring James Gandolfini  
Lorraine Bracco  
Edie Falco  
Michael Imperioli  
Dominic Chianese  
Steven Van Zandt  
Tony Sirico  
Robert Iler  
Jamie-Lynn Sigler  
Drea de Matteo  
Aida Turturro  
Steven R. Schirripa  
Nancy Marchand  
Vincent Pastore  
Joe Pantoliano  
Vincent Curatola  
Frank Vincent  
John Ventimiglia  
Federico Castelluccio  
Sharon Angela  
Kathrine Narducci  
Steve Buscemi  
David Proval  
Joseph R. Gannascoli  
Dan Grimaldi  
  
Opening theme "Woke Up This Morning" (Chosen One Mix)  
by Alabama 3  
Country of origin <IMG> United States  
Language(s) English  
No. of seasons 6  
No. of episodes 86 (List of episodes)  
Production  
Executive producer(s) David Chase  
Brad Grey  
Ilene S. Landress (Seasons 4-6)  
Robin Green & Mitchell Burgess (Seasons 2-5)  
Terence Winter (Seasons 5-6)  
Matthew Weiner (Season 6, Part 2)  
Location(s) New Jersey (primarily in Essex, Bergen, and Hudson counties)  
Silvercup Studios  
Running time approx. 50 min.  
Broadcast  
Original channel HBO  
Picture format Film shown as NTSC or PAL (depending of the country)  
480i/576i (SDTV)  
720p/1080i (HDTV)  
Audio format Stereo  
Dolby Digital 5.1  
Original run January 10, 1999 â June 10, 2007  
External links  
Official website  
For the novel, see The Sopranos (novel).

The Sopranos is an American television drama series created and produced by
David Chase. It was originally broadcast in the United States on the premium
cable network HBO from January 10, 1999 to June 10, 2007, spanning six seasons
and 86 episodes. Since premiering on HBO, the show has been broadcast by many
networks in dozens of other countries. Set in New Jersey, where it also was
produced, the series revolves around mobster Tony Soprano (James Gandolfini)
and the difficulties he faces as he tries to balance the often conflicting
requirements of his home life and the criminal organization he heads.

A major commercial and critical success, The Sopranos is the most financially
successful cable series in the history of television[1] and has frequently
been described by critics as one of the greatest television series of all
time. The series is noted for its high level of quality in all aspects of
production and has been particularly recognized for its writing and the
performances of its lead actors.[2] The show has been credited for bringing a
greater level of artistry to the television medium and paving the way for many
successful drama series that followed.[3][4] It has also won numerous awards,
including twenty-one Emmys and five Golden Globes.

A staple of 2000s American popular culture, The Sopranos has been the subject
of much parody, controversy and analysis, and has spawned books,[5] a video
game,[6] high-charting soundtrack albums, and a large amount of assorted
merchandise.[7]

## Contents

  * 1 Production
    * 1.1 Conception
    * 1.2 Casting
    * 1.3 Crew
    * 1.4 Music
    * 1.5 Sets and locations
    * 1.6 Title sequence
  * 2 Characters
  * 3 Plot synopsis and episode list
    * 3.1 Season 1
    * 3.2 Season 2
    * 3.3 Season 3
    * 3.4 Season 4
    * 3.5 Season 5
    * 3.6 Season 6
  * 4 Themes and characteristics
    * 4.1 Dreams
    * 4.2 Ineptitude of mobsters
    * 4.3 References and allusions
      * 4.3.1 Goodfellas
      * 4.3.2 The Godfather
    * 4.4 Product placement
  * 5 Reception
    * 5.1 Critical response and impact
    * 5.2 Awards
    * 5.3 Controversy
  * 6 DVD releases
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Production

### [edit] Conception

Before creating The Sopranos, David Chase had been a television writer for
over 20 years.[8][9] He had been employed as a staff writer/producer for
several television series (including Kolchak: The Night Stalker, The Rockford
Files, I'll Fly Away, and Northern Exposure)[10][11] and had created one
short-lived original series, Almost Grown, in 1988.[12][13] Before his success
with The Sopranos, Chase had won two Emmy Awards: one in 1980 for writing the
TV movie Off the Minnesota Strip, and one in 1978 for his work on the The
Rockford Files (shared with fellow producers).[14][15]

The story of The Sopranos was initially conceived as a feature film about "a
mobster in therapy having problems with his mother."[12] After some input from
his manager, Lloyd Braun, Chase decided to adapt it into a television
series.[12] In 1995, Chase signed a development deal with production company
Brillstein-Grey and wrote the original pilot script.[14][9][16] Drawing
heavily from his personal life and his experiences growing up in New Jersey,
Chase has stated that he tried to "apply [his own] family dynamic to
mobsters."[17] For instance, the tumultuous relationship between series
protagonist Tony Soprano and his mother, Livia, is partially based on Chase's
relationship with his own mother.[17] Chase was also in therapy at the time
and modeled the character of Dr. Jennifer Melfi after his own
psychiatrist.[18] Chase had been fascinated by the Mafia from an early age,
having been raised on classic gangster films like The Public Enemy and the
crime series The Untouchables as well as witnessing such people growing up.
The series was named after high school friends of his.[8][18] Chase thought
the Mafia setting would allow him to explore themes such as Italian-American
identity and the nature of violence, among many others.[12][16] Chase himself
is Italian-American, his original family name being DeCesare.[19]

Chase and producer Brad Grey, of Brillstein-Grey, pitched The Sopranos to
several networks; FOX showed interest but passed on it after Chase presented
them the pilot script.[16] Chase and Grey eventually pitched the show to then-
president of HBO Original Programming, Chris Albrecht, who recognized the
originality and potential of the show, and decided to finance the shooting of
a pilot episode.[14][9] Albrecht is quoted as saying:

> I said to myself, this show is about a guy who's turning 40. He's inherited
a business from his dad. He's trying to bring it into the modern age. He's got
all the responsibilities that go along with that. He's got an overbearing mom
that he's still trying to get out from under. Although he loves his wife, he's
had an affair. He's got two teenage kids, and he's dealing with the realities
of what that is. He's anxious; he's depressed; he starts to see a therapist
because he's searching for the meaning of his own life. I thought: the only
difference between him and everybody I know is he's the Don of New Jersey.[9]

The pilot episode (called "The Sopranos" on the DVD release but commonly just
referred to as "Pilot") was shot in 1997.[20] Chase, having previously
directed episodes of The Rockford Files and Almost Grown,[11] directed it
himself. After the pilot was finished and shown to the HBO executives, the
show was put on hold for a year before HBO eventually decided to produce it
and ordered a full 13-episode season.[14][9] The show premiered on HBO on
January 10, 1999 with the pilot episode. The Sopranos was the second hour-long
television drama series produced by HBO, the first being the prison drama Oz.

### [edit] Casting

<IMG>

<IMG>

Season 6 cast

Like the characters they portray on the show, many of the actors on The
Sopranos are Italian-American. Because Italian-American actors are often cast
as Mafia-types in Hollywood productions, many cast members had appeared
together in films and television series before joining the cast of The
Sopranos. The series shares a total of 27 actors with the 1990 Martin Scorsese
gangster film, Goodfellas, including main cast members Lorraine Bracco,
Michael Imperioli, and Tony Sirico. Eight Sopranos actors also appeared in the
1999 comedy Mickey Blue Eyes.

The main cast was put together through a process of auditions and readings.
Actors often didn't know whether Chase liked their performances or not.[9]
Michael Imperioli, who beat out several actors for the part of Christopher
Moltisanti, recalls "He's got a poker face, so I thought he wasn't into me,
and he kept giving me notes and having me try it again, which often is a sign
that you're not doing it right. I thought, I'm not getting this. So he said,
'Thank you,' and I left. I didn't expect to hear back. And then they
called."[9] James Gandolfini was invited to audition for the part of Tony
Soprano after casting director Susan Fitzgerald saw a short clip of his
performance in the 1993 film True Romance.[9] Lorraine Bracco, who had
previously played the role of mob wife Karen Hill in Goodfellas, was
originally asked to play the role of Carmela Soprano. She took the role of Dr.
Jennifer Melfi instead because she wanted to try something different and felt
the part of the highly educated Dr. Melfi would be more of a challenge for
her.[21] Tony Sirico, who has a criminal background related to the Mafia,[22]
signed on to play Paulie Walnuts as long as his character was not to be a
"rat."[23] Chase invited musician "Little Steven" Van Zandt (known as the
guitarist of Bruce Springsteen's E Street Band) to audition for a part in his
series after seeing him live at the 1997 Rock & Roll Hall of Fame ceremony and
being impressed with his appearance and presence. Van Zandt, who had never
acted before, eventually agreed to star on the show on the condition that he
didn't take a part a professional actor was also trying out for. Chase then
created the character of Silvio Dante especially for Van Zandt.[24][25][26]
Silvio Dante's wife on the show is played by Van Zandt's real-life wife.

With the exception of Oscar nominee Bracco (Goodfellas), Dominic Chianese (The
Godfather Part II, along with stage work) and Emmy-winner Nancy Marchand (Lou
Grant), the cast of the debut season of the series consisted of largely
unknown actors. After the breakthrough success of the show, many cast members
were noted for their acting ability and received mainstream attention for
their performances.[27][9] Subsequent seasons saw some well-known actors (Joe
Pantoliano,[28] Robert Loggia,[29] Steve Buscemi,[30] Frank Vincent[31]) join
the starring cast along with well-known actors in recurring roles such as
Peter Bogdanovich,[32] John Heard,[33] Robert Patrick,[34] Peter Riegert,[35]
Annabella Sciorra,[36] and David Strathairn.[37] Several well known actors
appeared in just one episode, such as Charles S. Dutton,[38] Ken Leung[39],
Ben Kingsley, and Sydney Pollack.[40]

### [edit] Crew

Further information: List of The Sopranos writers and directors

Chase served as show runner, executive producer, and head writer during the
eight years the show was in production. He is known for being a very
controlling and specific producer.[8][15] In addition to writing several
episodes per season, Chase would oversee all the editing, consult with episode
directors and do extensive but uncredited re-writes of episodes written by
other writers.[27][41] Many members of the creative team behind The Sopranos
were handpicked by Chase, some being old friends and colleagues of his; others
were selected after interviews conducted by producers of the show.[9][42]

Many of the show's writers worked in television prior to The Sopranos. Writing
team and married couple Robin Green and Mitchell Burgess, who together wrote
or co-wrote 19 episodes of the series between 1999 and 2006, had worked with
Chase on Northern Exposure.[43] Two-time Emmy Award-winner Terence Winter, who
became a writer for the show during its second season, practiced law for two
years before deciding to pursue a career as a screenwriter, eventually
catching the attention of Chase.[44] Matthew Weiner, a staff writer during the
show's final three seasons, wrote a spec script for a show called Mad Men in
2000 (it was eventually produced by AMC in 2007). The script was passed on to
Chase who, after reading it, was so impressed that he immediately offered
Weiner a job as a writer for The Sopranos.[45] Two cast members also wrote
episodes for the show: Michael Imperioli, who plays Christopher Moltisanti, is
also a screenwriter and wrote five episodes of the series, many of which deal
with Italian-American issues;[46] Toni Kalem, who plays Angie Bonpensiero,
also wrote the season five episode "All Happy Families...".[47]

Before directing The Sopranos, many of the directors had worked on other
television series. Many of the directors also have backgrounds in independent
films.[42] The most frequent directors of the series were Tim Van Patten (20
episodes), John Patterson (13 episodes), Allen Coulter (12 episodes), and Alan
Taylor (9 episodes), all of whom have a background in television.[42]
Recurring cast members Steve Buscemi and Peter Bogdanovich have also acted as
directors for the series.[48][49] Chase directed two episodes himself, the
pilot and the series finale.[50] Alik Sakharov was the show's original
director of photography, later alternating episodes with Phil Abraham.[51] The
show's photography and directing is noted for its feature film-quality.[3][52]
This look was achieved by Chase collaborating with Sakharov: "David wanted a
look that would have its own two feet. [...] From the pilot, we would sit down
with the whole script and break the scenes down into shots. That's what you do
with feature films."[51]

### [edit] Music

Main article: Music on The Sopranos

The Sopranos is noted for its eclectic music selections and has received
considerable critical attention for its effective use of previously recorded
songs.[53][54][55][56] Chase personally selected all of the show's music with
producer Martin Bruestle and music editor Kathryn Dayak, sometimes also
consulting Steven Van Zandt.[53] The music was usually selected once the
production and editing of an episode was completed, but on occasion sequences
were filmed to match preselected pieces of music.[41]

The show's opening theme is "Woke Up This Morning" (Chosen One Mix), written
and performed by British band Alabama 3.[57] A different song plays over the
closing credits of each episode, with few exceptions.[55] Many songs are
repeated multiple times through an episode, such as "Living on a Thin Line" by
The Kinks in the season three episode "University" and "Glad Tidings" by Van
Morrison in the season five finale "All Due Respect".[55] Other songs are
heard several times throughout the series. A notable example is "Con te
partirÃ²", performed by Italian singer Andrea Bocelli,[58] which serves as
something of a theme song for the character of Carmela Soprano.[59] While the
show utilizes a wealth of previously recorded music, it is also notable for
its lack of originally composed incidental music, compared to other television
programs.[60]

Two soundtrack albums containing music from the series have been released. The
first, titled The Sopranos: Music from the HBO Original Series, was released
in 1999. It contains selections from the show's first two seasons and reached
#54 on the U.S. Billboard 200.[61][62] A second soundtrack compilation, titled
The Sopranos: Peppers & Eggs: Music from the HBO Original Series, was released
in 2001. This double-disc album contains songs and selected dialogue from the
show's first three seasons.[63] It reached #38 on the U.S. Billboard 200.[64]

### [edit] Sets and locations

<IMG>

<IMG>

On the set of The Sopranos in New Jersey during the shooting of the final
episode

Most of the exterior shots of the series were filmed on location[65] in New
Jersey, with the majority of the interior shots â including most indoor
shots of the Soprano residence, the back room of the strip club Bada Bing!,
and Dr. Melfi's psychiatrist's office â filmed at Silvercup Studios in Long
Island City, Queens, New York City.[27]

The pork store, a frequent hangout for the mobsters on the show, was in the
pilot known as Centanni's Meat Market, an actual butchery in Elizabeth, New
Jersey.[66] After the series was picked up by HBO, the producers leased a
building with a store front in Kearny, New Jersey.[66] For the remainder of
the production period, this building served as the shooting location for
scenes outside and inside the pork store, now renamed Satriale's.[66] After
the series ended, the building was demolished.[67] Bada Bing!, a strip club
owned and operated by the character Silvio Dante on the show, is an actual go
go bar on Route 17 in Lodi, New Jersey.[66] Exteriors and interiors (except
for the back room) were shot on location.[66] The club is called Satin Dolls
and was an existing business before the show started.[68] The club continued
to operate during the eight years the show was filmed there and continues to
do so now. As such, a business arrangement was worked out with the owner.[68]
Locations manager Mark Kamine recalls that the owner was "very gracious" as
long as the shooting did not "conflict with his business time."[68] All the
exterior and some interior shots of the Soprano residence were filmed on
location at a private residence in North Caldwell, New Jersey.[66]

### [edit] Title sequence

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Sopranos title screen

A recognizable part of The Sopranos is the program's opening title sequence.
Tony Soprano is seen emerging from the Lincoln Tunnel and entering the New
Jersey Turnpike. Numerous landmarks in and around Newark and Elizabeth, New
Jersey are shown.[69] The sequence ends with Tony pulling into the driveway of
his suburban home. Chase has said that the goal of the title sequence was to
show that this particular Mafia show was about New Jersey, as opposed to New
York, where most such dramas have been set.[70]

In the first three seasons, between Tony leaving the tunnel and entering the
Turnpike, an image of the World Trade Center towers can be seen in his side
rear-view mirror. After the September 11, 2001 attacks, this shot was removed,
beginning with the show's fourth season.[71]

## [edit] Characters

Main article: List of characters from The Sopranos

Anthony "Tony" Soprano (James Gandolfini) is the quick-tempered and fierce de
facto Boss of the New Jersey-based DiMeo crime family and patriarch of the
Soprano household.[72] Tony begins to suffer from depression and have many
panic attacks after years of stress over his "business", repressed emotions
and a difficult childhood. He seeks treatment from Dr. Jennifer Melfi
(Lorraine Bracco).[73] Adding to Tony's complicated life is his strained
relationship with his wife Carmela Soprano (Edie Falco)[74] and their two
children, Meadow (Jamie-Lynn Sigler)[75] and Anthony Junior (Robert Iler).[76]

The starring cast includes members of Tony's extended family including his
mother Livia (Nancy Marchand),[77] sister Janice (Aida Turturro),[78] uncle
Corrado "Junior" Soprano (Dominic Chianese), who is the technical Boss
(although, eventually, semi-retired until he's completely out of the business
due to health issues) of the crime family,[79] cousin Tony Blundetto (Steve
Buscemi)[80] and nephew (actually cousin-by-marriage) Christopher Moltisanti
(Michael Imperioli).[81] Both Livia and Janice are shrewd manipulators with
emotional problems of their own. Tony's Uncle Junior is involved in his
criminal organization and their family bond ties with their criminal
ambitions. Both his cousin Tony and nephew Christopher are also involved with
his "other" family and their actions are a further source of conflict.
Christopher struggles with drug addiction and alcoholism, and a desire to gain
respect, while Tony Blundetto hopes to go straight but has a violent streak.

Tony's close circle within the DiMeo crime family includes Silvio Dante
(Steven Van Zandt),[82] Paul "Paulie Walnuts" Gualtieri (Tony Sirico)[83] and
Salvatore "Big Pussy" Bonpensiero (Vincent Pastore).[84] Silvio is Tony's
consigliere and best friend. Paulie and Big Pussy are longtime soldiers and
close allies who have worked with Tony and his father; Paulie soon becomes
capo and eventually is further promoted to underboss. Also in Tony's criminal
organization are Patsy Parisi (Dan Grimaldi)[85] and Furio Giunta (Federico
Castelluccio).[86] Patsy is a quiet soldier with a head for figures. Furio is
imported muscle from Italy who acts as Tony's feared enforcer.

Other significant characters in the DiMeo family include Bobby "Bacala"
Baccalieri (Steven R. Schirripa),[87] Richie Aprile (David Proval),[88] Ralph
Cifaretto (Joe Pantoliano),[89] Eugene Pontecorvo (Robert Funaro)[90] and Vito
Spatafore (Joseph R. Gannascoli).[91] Bobby is a subordinate of Junior's whom
Tony initially bullies but later accepts into his inner circle. Cifaretto is a
clever, ambitious top-earner but his arrogance and tendency to be obnoxious,
disrespectful and very violent make Tony resentful. Richie Aprile is released
from prison in season two and quickly makes waves in the organization.
Pontecorvo is a young soldier who becomes a made man alongside Christopher.
Spatafore works his way up through the ranks to become top earner of the
Aprile Crew but has a secret in his personal life.

Friends of the Soprano family include Herman "Hesh" Rabkin (Jerry Adler),[92]
Adriana La Cerva (Drea de Matteo),[93] Rosalie Aprile (Sharon Angela)[94]
Angie Bonpensiero (Toni Kalem), along with Artie (John Ventimiglia)[95] and
Charmaine Bucco (Kathrine Narducci).[96] Hesh is an adviser and friend to
Tony, and served in this role under Tony's father. Adriana is Christopher's
long time girlfriend; the two have a tempestuous relationship. Rosalie is the
widow of the previous DiMeo boss and a close friend of Carmela. Angie is
Salvatore Bonpensiero's wife who later goes into business for herself. Artie
and Charmaine are school friends of the Sopranos and owners of the popular
restaurant Vesuvio. Charmaine wishes to have no association with Tony and his
crew due to his criminal activities, and often has to insist because Artieâa
law-abiding and hard-working manâis drawn to Tony's way of life.

John "Johnny Sack" Sacramoni (Vince Curatola),[97] Phil Leotardo (Frank
Vincent)[98] and "Little" Carmine Lupertazzi, Jr. (Ray Abruzzo)[99] are all
significant characters from the New York-based Lupertazzi crime family, which
shares a good amount of its business with the Soprano organization. Although
the Lupertazzis' and DiMeos' interests are often at odds, Tony maintains a
cordial, business-like relationship with Johnny Sack, preferring to make deals
that benefit both families. His second-in-command and eventual successor, Phil
Leotardo, is less friendly and is harder for Tony to do business with. Little
Carmine is the son of the family's first boss and vies for power with the
others.

## [edit] Plot synopsis and episode list

Main article: List of The Sopranos episodes

See also: The Sopranos timeline

### [edit] Season 1

The series begins with Tony Soprano collapsing after suffering a panic attack.
This prompts him to begin therapy with Dr. Jennifer Melfi. Gradually, the
storyline reveals: details of Tony's upbringing, with his father's influence
looming large on his development as a gangster, but more so that Tony's
mother, Livia, was manipulative and possibly psychotic; his complicated
relationship with his wife Carmela, as well as her feelings regarding her
husband's cosa nostra ties; the lives of his children, Meadow and Anthony Jr.,
who both have increasing knowledge of their father's mob dealings; federal
indictments being brought as a result of someone in his organization talking
to the FBI; and his own Uncle plotting his death. After ordering the execution
of Brendan Filone and the mock execution of Chris Moltisanti, Tony's Uncle
Junior had been installed as boss of the family (following the death of
previous boss Jackie Aprile, Sr. from cancer), while actually Tony controls
most things from behind the scenes. Furious at Junior's plan to have him
killed, Tony responds to the attempt on his life with a violent reprisal and
confronts his mother for her role in plotting his downfall. She has a
psychologically triggered pseudo-stroke. Junior is arrested by the FBI.

### [edit] Season 2

At the beginning of the second season, Jackie's brother Richie Aprile is
released from prison and proves to be uncontrollable in the business arena; he
also starts a relationship with Tony's sister Janice, who has arrived from
Seattle. Tony's friend "Big Pussy" returns to New Jersey after a conspicuous
absence and Tony realizes he is an FBI informant. Tony, Silvio Dante, and
Paulie Walnuts kill Big Pussy on a boat then wrap him up in chains and throw
him overboard.

Christopher Moltisanti becomes engaged to his longtime girlfriend Adriana La
Cerva. Matthew Bevilaqua and Sean Gismonte, two low-level soldiers
dissatisfied with their perceived lack of success in the Soprano crew, try to
make a name for themselves by attempting to kill Christopher. Their plan
backfires; Christopher survives the attack (though he is critically wounded),
and kills Sean in self-defense, while Tony and Big Pussy murder Matthew soon
afterward.

Junior is placed under house arrest as he awaits trial. Richie, frustrated
with Tony's authority over him, entreats Junior to have Tony killed. Junior
feigns interest, then informs Tony of Richie's intentions, leaving Tony with
another problem to address. However, the situation is defused unexpectedly
when Janice kills Richie in a violent argument; Tony and his men conceal all
evidence of the murder, and Janice returns to Seattle.

### [edit] Season 3

The third season sees the return of the ambitious Ralph Cifaretto after a long
absence in Florida. He gets involved with Rosalie Aprile, widow of the former
boss, Jackie Aprile, Sr. Despite a personal animosity and a wariness toward
his destructive behavior (Ralph murdered a stripper at the Bada Bing,
prompting Tony to assault him, violating Mafia code regarding conduct toward
fellow made men), Tony promotes him to caporegime because of his professional
success. Meadow, now a freshman at Columbia University, begins dating Noah
Tannenbaum, who is multiracial; he becomes the target of Tony's racist ire,
and Noah eventually ends their relationship.

Jackie Aprile, Jr. becomes involved with Meadow, and then descends into an
increasingly reckless life of drugs and crime. Tony initially attempts to act
as a mentor to Jackie, but becomes increasingly impatient with his escalating
misbehavior, particularly as Jackie's relationship with Meadow grows more
serious. Despite Tony's counselâand warningâJackie crosses a line by
organizing a botched robbery attempt on Ralph's card game. Tony decides to
give Ralph the decision regarding Jackie Jr.'s punishment. Despite his role as
a surrogate father, Ralph ultimately decides to have Jackie Jr. killed.

Livia dies of a stroke. Tony begins an affair with Gloria Trillo, who is also
a patient of Dr. Melfi. Their relationship is brief and tumultuous. Meanwhile
Dr. Melfi is raped. Junior is diagnosed with stomach cancer; following
chemotherapy, it goes into remission. A.J. continues to get in trouble at
school, despite success on the football team; this culminates in his
expulsion.

### [edit] Season 4

In the fourth season, New York underboss Johnny Sack becomes enraged after
learning of an inappropriate joke made by Ralph about his wife. He seeks
permission to have him killed in retribution, but is denied; tensions between
the two eventually cool. Tony later murders Ralph in a violent rage because he
believes Ralph killed their racehorse Pie-O-My in a stable fire.

Following the death of Bobby Baccalieri's wife, Janice pursues a romantic
relationship with him. Christopher's addiction to heroin deepens, prompting
his associates and family to organize an intervention, after which he enters a
drug rehabilitation center. Adriana befriends a woman who is secretly an FBI
agent; when Adriana terminates their friendship suddenly, she is brought in
and compelled to become a federal informant. Junior faces his RICO trial; it
is ultimately declared a mistrial.

Carmela, whose relationship with Tony is tense due to financial worries and
Tony's infidelities, develops a mutual infatuation with Furio Giunta. Fearing
the consequences of engaging in a relationship with the wife of a mob boss,
Furio returns home to Italy suddenly, leaving Carmela despondent. After Tony's
former mistress calls their home and drunkenly details his improprieties,
Carmela throws Tony out. Tony is approached by Johnny Sack with a proposal to
murder Carmine Lupertazzi, which he eventually turns down.

### [edit] Season 5

In the fifth season, Tony's cousin Tony Blundetto is released from prison
alongside other mob figures. Carmine dies unexpectedly and his failure to
nominate a successor leads to a power struggle in New York between Carmine Jr
and Johnny Sack. Despite trying to avoid returning to organized crime,
Blundetto gets involved in the conflict against Tony's orders. When Blundetto
kills the brother of Phil Leotardo, Johnny Sack demands that Tony turn him in.
Refusing to do so provokes the New York faction, and eventually Tony elects to
kill Blundetto himself rather than hand him over to be tortured.

Tony and Carmela remain separated, with Tony living at his parents' former
house with childhood friend Artie Bucco, who was also left by his wife.
Carmela, now the sole authority figure for A.J. in the Soprano house, becomes
frustrated as her rules lead her son to resent her; eventually she allows A.J.
to live with his father. She has a brief relationship with Robert Weigler,
A.J.'s school guidance counselor; he breaks it off abruptly when he suspects
that she is manipulating him to improve A.J.'s grades. Tony and Carmela
reconcile their marriage; Tony promises to be more discreet, and also agrees
to pay for a piece of real estate Carmela wishes to develop.

Adriana continues working as an FBI informant. After being implicated in a
murder at her nightclub, federal agents give Adriana an ultimatum: get
Christopher to cooperate or go to prison. She confesses her secret to
Christopher; initially angry, he then becomes more receptive to the idea of
entering witness protection. However, he has another change of heart and tells
Tony about Adriana. Tony, with Christopher's understanding, orders Silvio to
kill her. Tony approaches Johnny Sack to put an end to the bloodshed between
their families and get back to business. As they meet Johnny Sack is arrested
by the FBI as Tony flees.

### [edit] Season 6

At the beginning of the sixth season, Tony is shot by the now senile and
confused Uncle Junior. Rendered comatose, Tony dreams he is a salesman on a
business trip, where he mistakenly exchanges his briefcase and identification
with a man named Kevin Finnerty. Tony's recovery from the shooting changes his
outlook, and he tries to mend his ways. However, he is faced with more
problems in his business life. Vito Spatafore is outed as a homosexual and
Tony is urged to deal with the problem by Phil Leotardo, now acting boss of
New York with Johnny Sack in prison. When Tony fails to act, Phil intervenes
and kills Spatafore. Tony's crime family commits a reprisal murder and once
more it appears that the families are on the verge of all-out war.

Tony considers killing several of his associates for relatively minor
infractions. Christopher is unable to leave the mob, deflecting his problems
by relapsing into drug addiction and kills his friend from Narcotics
Anonymous. He is then seriously injured in a car accident that he causes while
driving under the influence of narcotics. Tony, the sole passenger, is not
badly hurt, and suffocates Christopher to death. A.J. is dumped by his
fiancÃ©e and slips into depression, culminating in a failed suicide attempt in
the backyard pool. Dr. Melfi is convinced by friends that Tony is making no
progress and may even be using talking therapy for his own sociopathic
benefit. She drops him as a patient.

Johnny Sack dies from lung cancer while imprisoned and Leotardo consolidates
his position in the Lupertazzi family. He has his opposition for leadership
killed and then officially takes over. In a resumption of their past feud Phil
will not compromise with Tony on a garbage deal. When Tony assaults a
Lupertazzi soldier for harassing Meadow on a date, Phil seizes a chance for
revenge. Phil orders the executions of Bobby Baccalieri, who is shot to death,
Silvio, who ends up comatose, and Tony, who goes into hiding. A deal is
brokered where the rest of the Lupertazzi family agree to ignore the order to
kill Tony, and give Tony an opportunity to go after Phil. An FBI agent informs
Tony of Phil's location and Tony has him killed. With Philâs death, the
threat from New York is presumably extinguished and Tony, Carmela, Meadow, and
A.J. meet for a casual dinner.

## [edit] Themes and characteristics

The Sopranos is noted for David Chase's multifaceted, symbolism-heavy style of
writing and the series has consistently been the subject of feverish
analysis.[100] Chase and his co-writers addressed a large number of
psychological, philosophical, social and political themes throughout the
series' run.

### [edit] Dreams

    See also: Tony Soprano's dreams
A distinctive aspect of The Sopranos is its dream sequences. Chase, who wrote
most of the dream sequences,[101] states of them, "We've used those dreams to
further the narrative. For example, "Funhouse" could have been a story in
which Tony gets some information that Pussy's the rat and he tracks it down
and we do some stultifying procedural until we have the proof in hand. And I
just couldn't go through that. I can't stand that (stuff). So we just decided
it would be more interesting, that on some level Tony knows this, that his
friend is betraying him, and it makes him ill in combination with some bad
chicken, and his subconscious erupts like that and gives him the
information."[101] The dream sequence includes Tony talking to Big Pussy as a
fish and realizing his friend is an FBI informant. Another famous dream is the
sequence in "The Test Dream" that is over 20 minutes in length.[101]

Season six contains the longest continuous "dream" sequence with Tony as a
regular man having his identity mistaken for a man named Kevin Finnerty.[102]
In the dream, Tony is stuck in Costa Mesa, California, a city he had traveled
to for business, and because of mistaken identity, he cannot travel home.
Finnerty is portrayed as a salesman who lives a conservative, law-abiding
life. During this sequence, he has a memorable run-in with Buddhist monks at a
nearby monastery [102]

### [edit] Ineptitude of mobsters

The mobsters in the series are depicted as tough, savvy, and street-smart but
lacking heavily in formal education and a deeper understanding of themselves
and their world. The mobsters' educational and linguistic shortcomings,
particularly those of Paulie Walnuts and Christopher, are often a source of
humor.[103] The characters themselves are frequently oblivious of their use of
malapropisms and misunderstandings of basic history and common knowledge.

The gangsters' incompetence is in some way displayed in every episode of the
series. Some of the more notable examples include:

  * Much of the episode "Pine Barrens" is devoted to the failings of Paulie and Christopher as they attempt to survive a single day and night in a snowy wilderness after a botched execution. Also in the episode Christopher shows his ignorance of history when he expresses disbelief that the Cuban Missile Crisis actually occurred by saying: "That was real? I saw that movie. I thought it was bullshit."[104]
  * Bobby Baccalieri draws the ire of Tony while discussing world events and biblical prophecy by erroneously stating that "Quasimodo predicted all of this." Tony then corrects him by saying that he meant Nostradamus and that Quasimodo was the Hunchback of Notre Dame. Baccalieri then continues the conversation by mentioning the backfield of the Notre Dame Fighting Irish football team, now thinking that a hunchback is like a halfback.[105]
  * Although more intelligent than his cohorts, Tony often uses malapropisms and repeats things that Dr. Melfi says to him elsewhere, only to get the phrase entirely wrong or to completely miss the point. Some of his more famous malapropisms include "revenge is like serving cold cuts" (a mangling of the expression "revenge is a dish best served cold")[106] and describing l'amour fou (a French expression meaning "crazy love") as "our mofo."[107]
  * Recurring character "Little Carmine" Lupertazzi's delusions of eloquence are a consistent source of comedy for viewers.[103] He often muddles metaphors, once telling Tony that "You're at the precipice of an enormous crossroad."[108] "I have nine pictures under my sub-species," he at one time says of his movie-producing.[106] He also explains the final scene of the fictitious mafia/slasher movie Cleaver as a mix of "the sacred and the propane."[109]

Some mobsters are portrayed as smart and well-spoken in contrast, though they
appear to be exceptions to the rule. For instance, Johnny Sack, Ralph
Cifaretto, and Tony Blundetto are all highly intelligent (Blundetto allegedly
has an IQ of 158) and relatively articulate, rarely committing malapropisms,
although Cifaretto is socially inept and lacks tact.[110]

### [edit] References and allusions

#### [edit] Goodfellas

Chase has stated that the Martin Scorsese gangster film Goodfellas was a
source of inspiration for him, calling the 1990 movie his "Koran".[111]

The Sopranos began with four starring cast members (Lorraine Bracco, Michael
Imperioli, Tony Sirico and Vincent Pastore) who had appeared in Goodfellas.
Joseph Gannascoli, who can be seen briefly in the film as an uncredited extra,
joined the show's cast as Vito Spatafore in the second season, and later Frank
Vincent, another Goodfellas cast member, joined the cast as Phil Leotardo.
Many other recurring and minor characters in the series had previously
appeared in the film. In total, 27 actors appeared in both productions.
Goodfellas star Ray Liotta was an early candidate to play Tony Soprano. Later
on, Liotta also turned down the role of Ralph Cifaretto.[112]

The series makes references to the film as well. For instance, in Goodfellas,
Michael Imperioli's character "Spider" is shot in the foot. In The Sopranos
episode "The Legend of Tennessee Moltisanti", his character Christopher
Moltisanti shoots a store attendant in the foot. As the attendant screams in
pain, yelling "You shot me in the foot!", Christopher exits, saying "It
happens."[113] In Goodfellas, Lorraine Bracco's character is abused and she
tells her husband, Henry Hill, who takes action against the abuser; in The
Sopranos, her character, Dr. Melfi, is raped, but refuses to tell Tony.

#### [edit] The Godfather

The Sopranos is connected in numerous ways to Francis Ford Coppola's Godfather
trilogy. The show shares several cast members with the three films; most
notably, Dominic Chianese, who portrays Junior Soprano on the series, plays
Johnny Ola in The Godfather Part II.[114]

Furthermore, it is made clear that the mob characters on The Sopranos are
themselves quite familiar with and fond of the films, so much so that, in
their conversations with one another, they often refer to each film by its
number in the series (calling the first film "One", and so on).[115] Early in
the series, Silvio Dante occasionally does an impression of Al Pacino as
Michael Corleone.[116] Tony's own affection for the films is stated; as his
crew watch a bootleg DVD of the second film just before traveling to Italy, he
claims his favorite part of all the films is the portion in Part II in which
Vito Corleone returns to Italy. In season 6, A.J. attempted a murder on Uncle
Junior, saying one of Tony's favorite moments in The Godfather is when Michael
Corleone takes revenge for his father. [117]

Also, critics have noted a number of visual and symbolic homages and
references to The Godfather in the show. For example, in the first season,
when two men attempt to murder Tony, he has just bought a bottle of orange
juice; this alludes to a scene in the first Godfather film in which Vito is
buying oranges just before he is shot.[118] In addition, following the death
of Livia Soprano in the third season, there is a scene of Tony taking an
elevator to the funeral home basement, where the undertaker assures him he
will "use all [his] power, and all [his] skills" on Livia's behalf. The scene
is a direct homage to the scene in The Godfather where Vito calls on a favor
from Bonasera following the murder of his son, Santino.[119]

Author Peter E. Bondanella argues that the show's references to the classic
mob drama amount to something greater than simple parody or homage. He says
that Chase "employs references to the Coppola masterpieces in a clever manner,
using them both to delight us when we recognize them and to add layers of
meaning to his own stories."[119]

### [edit] Product placement

The Sopranos was consistent in the frequent depiction of actual brand names
for products on the program. This practice is widely regarded within the media
as product placement. The show's producers say that they never received
payment for featuring products on the show, though they did often receive the
products shown onscreen, including fine wines and computers, free of charge;
the real-life brands were used in order to enhance the show's sense of
realism.[120][121][122]

## [edit] Reception

### [edit] Critical response and impact

<IMG>

<IMG>

James Gandolfini and David Chase on the April 2007 cover of Vanity Fair

The Sopranos has been acknowledged by critics as one of the greatest and most
ground-breaking television series of all time, although critical appreciation
of the show has varied considerably from season to season.[20][123][124] It
has been called "perhaps the greatest pop-culture masterpiece of its day" by
Vanity Fair contributor Peter Biskind.[9] The New Yorker editor David Remnick
called the show "the richest achievement in the history of television."[125]
TV Guide ranked The Sopranos fifth on their list of the "Top 50 TV Shows of
All Time".[126] In 2007, Channel 4 (UK) named The Sopranos the greatest
television series of all time.[127] The show was also included on TIME
magazine's "The 100 Best TV Shows of All-TIME," with editor James Poniewozik
writing, "This mafia saga showed just how complex and involving TV
storytelling could be, inspiring an explosion of ambitious dramas on cable and
off."[124]

The first season of the series received overwhelmingly positive reviews.[128]
Following its initial airing in 1999, The New York Times stated "[The
Sopranos] just may be the greatest work of American popular culture of the
last quarter century."[14] In 2007, PopMatters wrote "the debut season of The
Sopranos remains the crowning achievement of American television."[129]

The writing, acting, and directing have often been singled out for praise. The
show has also received considerable attention from critics and journalists for
its music selections, cinematography, and willingness to deal with difficult
subjects.[124][52]

The Sopranos has inspired a number of scholarly books on the series, including
This Thing of Ours: Investigating The Sopranos and Reading The Sopranos: Hit
TV from HBO, both edited by David Lavery, as well as Regina Barreca's A
Sitdown with The Sopranos and Maurice Yacowar's The Sopranos on the Couch.

### [edit] Awards

Main article: List of The Sopranos awards and nominations

The Sopranos was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama
Series in every year of its run. After being nominated for and losing the
award in 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2003 (losing the first time to The Practice,
then the latter three to The West Wing), The Sopranos won the award in 2004,
and again in 2007, becoming the first cable series to win the award.[130] Its
2007 win made The Sopranos the first drama show since Upstairs, Downstairs in
1977 to win the award after it had finished airing.[131] The show earned 21
nominations for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series, winning the award six
times.[132]

The Sopranos won at least one Emmy Award for Acting in every season with the
exception of the years 2006 and 2007. James Gandolfini and Edie Falco were
each nominated five times for Outstanding Lead Actor and Actress,
respectively, each winning a total of three awards. Joe Pantoliano won an Emmy
for Outstanding Supporting Actor in 2003, and Michael Imperioli and Drea de
Matteo also won Emmys in 2004 for their supporting roles on the show. Other
actors who have received Emmy nominations for the series include Lorraine
Bracco (in the Lead Actress and Supporting Actress categories), Dominic
Chianese, Nancy Marchand, Aida Turturro, Steve Buscemi (who was also nominated
for directing the episode "Pine Barrens"), Tim Daly, John Heard and Annabella
Sciorra.[132]

In 2000 and 2001, The Sopranos earned two consecutive George Foster Peabody
Awards, considered by many to be the most prestigious prize in television.
Only two other series have won the award in consecutive years: Northern
Exposure and The West Wing.[133][134] The show also received numerous
nominations at the Golden Globe Awards (winning the award for Best Drama
Series in 2000)[135] and the major guild awards (Directors,[136]
Producers,[137] Writers,[138] and Actors[139]).

### [edit] Controversy

The show has been frequently criticized for allegedly perpetuating negative
stereotypes about Italian Americans. In 2000, Essex County officials denied
producers permission to film on county-owned property, arguing that the show
depicts Italian Americans in a "less than favorable light."[140] The show
addressed the topic of Italian American identity in the 2002 episode
"Christopher", which involved New York City's annual Columbus Day parade.
Later that year, Sopranos cast members were barred by parade organizers from
participating in the real-life event.[141]

Chase has defended his show, saying that it is not meant to stereotype all
Italian Americans, only a small criminal subculture.[142]

## [edit] DVD releases

Season Release dates Episodes Special features Discs  
Region 1 Region 2 Region 4  
1 December 12, 2000 November 24, 2003 November 24, 2003 13

  * A 77-minute interview with series creator David Chase, conducted by film historian and director Peter Bogdanovich.
  * "Family Life" featurette.
  * "Meet Tony Soprano" featurette.
  * One audio commentary by David Chase and Peter Bogdanovich for the pilot episode.[143]

4  
2 November 6, 2001 November 24, 2003 November 24, 2003 13

  * "The Real Deal" featurette.
  * "A Sit Down With Tony Soprano" featurette.
  * Four audio commentaries by crew members for the episodes "Commendatori", "From Where to Eternity", "The Knight in White Satin Armor", and "Funhouse".[144]

  
3 August 27, 2002 November 24, 2003 November 24, 2003 13

  * "A Day On The Set Of The Sopranos" featurette.
  * Three audio commentaries by crew members for the episodes "The Telltale Moozadell", "Pine Barrens", and "Amour Fou".[145]

  
4 October 28, 2003 November 3, 2003 November 3, 2003 13

  * Easter Eggs.
  * Episodic previews and recaps.
  * Cast and crew biographies.
  * Four audio commentaries by crew members for the episodes "The Weight", "Everybody Hurts", "Whoever Did This", and "Whitecaps".[146]

  
5 June 7, 2005 June 20, 2005 August 17, 2005 13

  * Five audio commentaries by cast and crew members for the episodes "All Happy Families...", "Sentimental Education", "In Camelot", "Cold Cuts", and "Long Term Parking".[147]

  
6

(Part 1)

November 7, 2006 November 27, 2006 March 7, 2007 12

  * Four audio commentaries by cast and crew members for the episodes "Join The Club", "Luxury Lounge", "The Ride", and "Kaisha".[148]

  
6

(Part 2)

October 23, 2007 November 19, 2007 January 31, 2008 9

  * "Making Cleaver: Behind the scenes of Christopher's horror film" featurette.
  * "The Music of The Sopranos" â Creator David Chase, cast, and crew discuss the songs from the show.
  * Four audio commentaries by cast members for the episodes "Soprano Home Movies", "Remember When", "The Second Coming", and "The Blue Comet".[149]

  
Complete HBO Seasons 1-6 Box Set N/A November 19, 2007 86

  * Collects the previously released box-sets.

28  
Complete series - Deluxe Edition November 11, 2008 November 24, 2008 86

  * Includes all special features from the previously released box-sets.
  * Never before seen scenes from all 6 seasons.
  * Exclusive interviews with David Chase conducted by actor Alec Baldwin.
  * Supper with The Sopranos: Two sit-down dinners with the cast and crew of the show as they discuss the series finale.
  * Lost scenes from all six seasons of The Sopranos.
  * Panel Center Seminar: Discussions featuring "whacked" characters.
  * Extra Gravy: Spoofs and Parodies including The Simpsons and Saturday Night Live.

30  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ Carter, Bill (2005-08-11). "ABC Pushes End of 'The Sopranos' to 2007". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2005/08/11/arts/television/11cnd-sopranos.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  2. ^ Stanley, Alessandra (2007-04-08). "This Thing of Ours, Itâs Over". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/08/arts/television/08stan.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  3. ^ a b Ryan, Maureen (2007-04-23). "The Sopranos Is the Most Influential Television Drama Ever". PopMatters. http://www.popmatters.com/pm/features/article/32795/the-sopranos-is-the-most-influential-television-drama-ever/. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  4. ^ Boedeker, Hal (2007-06-04). "How will 'The Sopranos' end?". PopMatters. http://www.popmatters.com/pm/news/article/42058/how-will-the-sopranos-end/. Retrieved on 2007-10-07.
  5. ^ "The Sopranos books at HBO Store". HBO. http://store.hbo.com/family/index.jsp?categoryId=1901329&cp=1885646. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  6. ^ "The Sopranos: Road to Respect at IGN". IGN. http://ps2.ign.com/objects/826/826381.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  7. ^ "HBO Store - The Sopranos". HBO. http://store.hbo.com/category/index.jsp?categoryId=1885646&clickid=mainnav_shows_txt. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  8. ^ a b c "David Chase profile at HBO.com". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/crew/david_chase.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  9. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Biskind, Peter (April 2007). "An American Family". Vanity Fair. http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2007/04/sopranos200704?currentPage=1. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  10. ^ Ehrmann, Bert (2006-03-20). "The Sopranos â "Oh Poor You!"". Fort Wayne Reader. http://www.fortwaynereader.com/story.php?uid=674. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  11. ^ a b "David Chase Biography (1945-)". www.filmreference.com. http://www.filmreference.com/film/53/David-Chase.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  12. ^ a b c d Lee, Mark (May 2007). "Wiseguys: A conversation between David Chase and Tom Fontana.". Writers Guild of America, west. http://www.wga.org/writtenby/writtenbysub.aspx?id=2354. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  13. ^ Baker, Kathryn (1988-11-23). "Almost Grown: tells story of growing up". Wichita Eagle. pp. 9A.
  14. ^ a b c d e Oxfeld, Jesse (2002). "Family Man". Stanford Magazine. http://www.stanfordalumni.org/news/magazine/2002/sepoct/features/chase.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  15. ^ a b "David Chase at Hollywood.com". www.hollywood.com. http://www.hollywood.com/celebrity/David_Chase/1115964. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  16. ^ a b c Chase, David and Peter Bogdanovich. (1999). "The Sopranos" - David Chase interview [DVD]. HBO.
  17. ^ a b Dougherty, Robin (1999-01-20). "Chasing TV". Salon.com. http://www.salon.com/ent/int/1999/01/20int.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  18. ^ a b Dana, Will (2006-03-10). ""Sopranos" Creator Shoots Straight". Rolling Stone. http://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/9448169/sopranos_creator_shoots_straight. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  19. ^ Zoller Seitz, Matt (2001-03-04). "Boss of bosses". The Star-Ledger. http://www.nj.com/sopranos/ledger/index.ssf?/sopranos/stories/030401chase.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-27.
  20. ^ a b Flaherty, Michael (2007-06-08). "Sopranos signoff marks end of era". The Hollywood Reporter. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/content_display/television/features/e3i5caaebc3b67867e5395b97e39aa8026d. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  21. ^ Davis, Ivor; Haward, Anthony (2004-07-18). "Sopranos star Lorraine Bracco thought her five minutes of fame had ended with Goodfellas.". www.lbracco.com. http://www.lbracco.com/stuffonline2004.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-11. ""We first spoke about Carmela," says Bracco, "but it would have been too much of the same for me if I'd taken it... I had done it in Goodfellas and I had done it very well, and to do it again was not the right thing. I told him I loved the script and wanted to play Dr. Melfi. And he bought it.""
  22. ^ "AmIAnnoying - Tony Sirico". AmIAnnoying.com. http://www.amiannoying.com/(S(gdv2j32jp5tjuvzglksj2t45))/view.aspx?ID=12567. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  23. ^ "Cast: The-Sopranos.com - Tony Sirico". www.thesopranos.com. http://www.the-sopranos.com/cast/tony.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  24. ^ "A Hit Man In More Ways Than One". CBS News. 2007-03-18. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2007/03/18/sunday/main2581880.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  25. ^ "Steven Van Zandt biography at Yahoo". Yahoo!. http://tv.yahoo.com/steven-van-zandt/contributor/1043027/bio. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  26. ^ Carter, Bill (2007-06-10). "One Final Whack at That HBO Mob". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/06/10/arts/television/10cart.html?_r=1&oref=slogin. Retrieved on 2007-11-27.
  27. ^ a b c Wolk, Josh (2007-04-06). "Burying the Sopranos". Entertainment Weekly. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20033896,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-07.
  28. ^ "Joe Pantoliano as Ralph Cifaretto". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/actor/joe_pantoliano.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-09-02.
  29. ^ "Robert Loggia as Michele "Feech" La Manna". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/actor/robert_loggia.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-09-02.
  30. ^ "Steve Buscemi as Tony Blundetto". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/actor/steve_buscemi.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-09-02.
  31. ^ "Frank Vincent as Phil Leotardo". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/actor/frank_vincent.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-09-02.
  32. ^ "Peter Bogdanovich as Dr. Elliott Kupferberg". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/actor/peter_bogdonavich.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-09-05.
  33. ^ "John Heard Biography". Yahoo! Movies. http://movies.yahoo.com/movie/contributor/1800021206/bio. Retrieved on 2008-09-05.
  34. ^ "Robert Patrick: The Unit on CBS". CBS. http://www.cbs.com/primetime/the_unit/bio/robert_patrick/bio.php. Retrieved on 2008-09-05.
  35. ^ "Profile: Peter Riegert". SFGate.com. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2001/09/18/DD154391.DTL&type=performance. Retrieved on 2008-09-05.
  36. ^ "Annabella Sciorra as Gloria Trillo". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/actor/annabella_sciorra.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-09-05.
  37. ^ "David Strathairn Biography". Yahoo! Movies. http://movies.yahoo.com/movie/contributor/1800019124/bio. Retrieved on 2008-09-05.
  38. ^ "Charles S. Dutton Filmography". The New York Times. http://movies.nytimes.com/person/20824/Charles-S-Dutton/filmography. Retrieved on 2008-09-05.
  39. ^ "Ken Leung Biography". Yahoo! Movies. http://movies.yahoo.com/movie/contributor/1800418093/bio. Retrieved on 2008-09-05.
  40. ^ Richmond, Ray (2007-04-09). "Sopranos finale begins on downbeat note". Reuters. http://www.reuters.com/article/entertainmentNews/idUSN0930398420070409. Retrieved on 2008-09-06.
  41. ^ a b Biskind, Peter (2007-03-13). "The Family that Preys Together". Vanity Fair. http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2007/03/chase200703. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  42. ^ a b c "HBO: The Sopranos: Cast and Crew". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  43. ^ Konow, David (2007-10-25). "The Sopranos From a Different Perspective". Fringe Drinking. http://www.tomsgames.com/us/fringedrinking/2007/10/the_sopranos_from_a_different.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  44. ^ "HBO: Terence Winter, Executive Producer : The Sopranos". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/crew/terence_winter.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  45. ^ Steinberg, Jacques (2007-07-18). "In Act 2, the TV Hit Man Becomes a Pitch Man". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/07/18/arts/television/18madm.html?ex=1342411200&en=c2bc74ac3cdf6288&ei=5088&partner=rssnyt&emc=rss. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  46. ^ "HBO: Michael Imperioli as Christopher Moltisanti: The Sopranos". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/actor/michael_imperioli.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  47. ^ "HBO: The Sopranos: Episode Guide: Season 5: Episode 56". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/episode/season5/episode56.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-09-03.
  48. ^ "HBO: Steve Buscemi, Director: The Sopranos". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/crew/steve_buscemi.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-09-03.
  49. ^ "HBO: Peter Bogdanovich, Director: The Sopranos". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/crew/peter_bogdanovich.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-09-03.
  50. ^ "David Chase directing his first feature". EW.com. 2008-05-09. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20198837,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-03.
  51. ^ a b "HBO: Sopranos: Behind the Scenes: Director of Photography Feature". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/dpfeature/index.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  52. ^ a b Cooper, Lorna (2007). "Bada Bye To The Sopranos". MSN. http://entertainment.uk.msn.com/tv/features/article.aspx?cp-documentid=6495000. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  53. ^ a b Sepinwall, Alan (2006-03-08). "The hits keep on coming". The Star-Ledger. http://www.nj.com/sopranos/ledger/index.ssf?/sopranos/stories/hits_seasonsix.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  54. ^ Gross, Joe (2000-01-04). "Sharps & Flats". Salon.com. http://archive.salon.com/ent/music/review/2000/01/04/sopranos/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  55. ^ a b c Ventre, Michael (2006-04-02). "Music another member of the Sopranosâ crew". MSNBC. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/11994702/. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  56. ^ Browne, David (2001-05-18). "The Sopranos; Peppers & Eggs". Entertainment Weekly. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,281317,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  57. ^ Gilbertson, Jon M. (2008-07-02). "Alabama 3 tastes some success, especially with âSopranosâ theme". Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. http://www.jsonline.com/story/index.aspx?id=768462. Retrieved on 2008-09-03.
  58. ^ "Con Te Partiro - abmusica.com". Andrea Bocelli Lyrics Archive. http://www.abmusica.com/ctp.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  59. ^ "The Sopranos - Family Values - FAQ". www.the-sopranos.com. http://www.the-sopranos.com/faq.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  60. ^ McDonald, Jim (2007-06-10). "Sopranos: One of the Most Popular TV Dramas of All Time!". findinarticles.com. http://findinarticles.com/asVSVjS/261452/Sopranos_-One-of-the-Most-Popular-TV-Dramas-of-All-Time_.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  61. ^ "Amazon.com: The Sopranos: Music From The HBO Original Series". Amazon.com. http://www.amazon.com/dp/B00003A9MG/. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  62. ^ "The Sopranos: Music from the HBO Original Series: Billboard Albums at Allmusic". Allmusic. http://www.allmusic.com/cg/amg.dll?p=amg&sql=10:gxfqxqekldje~T3. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  63. ^ "Amazon.com: The Sopranos - Peppers and Eggs: Music From The HBO Series". Amazon.com. http://www.amazon.com/dp/B00005AR37/. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  64. ^ "The Sopranos: Peppers & Eggs (Music From the HBO Original Series): Billboard Albums at Allmusic". Allmusic. http://www.allmusic.com/cg/amg.dll?p=amg&sql=10:gpfyxq80ldte~T3. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  65. ^ according to the sopranos page on the HBO website
  66. ^ a b c d e f Parrillo, Rosemary (2001-03-04). "The Locations". The Star-Ledger. http://www.nj.com/sopranos/stories/030401locations.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  67. ^ "'Sopranos' Pork Store Demolished". FOX News. 2007-11-12. http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,310659,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  68. ^ a b c Zoller Seitz, Matt (2000-01-16). "Location, location, location". The Star-Ledger. http://www.nj.com/sopranos/ledger/index.ssf?/sopranos/stories/location.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  69. ^ "HBO: The Sopranos: Behind the Scenes: Inside the Opening Credits". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/credits/index.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  70. ^ Chase, David. (1999). "The Sopranos" commentary track [DVD]. HBO.
  71. ^ A parody of the opening sequence was used in an episode of The Simpsons. In Papa's got a brand new badge, a variation on the sequence is used, with Fat Tony seen leaving a Springfield tunnel instead of Tony. Fat Tony then continues to drive through Springfield to the same soundtrack as the orignal. Pfefferman, Naomi (2001-10-12). "The Left âWingâ". The Jewish Journal of Greater Los Angeles. http://www.jewishjournal.com/home/preview.php?id=7574. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  72. ^ "Character profile - Tony Soprano". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/tony_soprano.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-09-28.
  73. ^ "Character profile - Dr. Jennifer Melfi". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/dr_melfi.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-09-28.
  74. ^ "Character profile - Carmela Soprano". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/carmela_soprano.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-09-28.
  75. ^ "Character profile - Meado (Meadow) Soprano". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/meadow_soprano.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-09-28.
  76. ^ "Character profile - AJ Soprano". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/anthony_soprano.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-09-28.
  77. ^ "Character profile - Livia Soprano". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/livia_soprano.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-09-28.
  78. ^ "Character profile - Janice Soprano". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/janice_soprano.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-09-28.
  79. ^ "Character profile - Corrado "Junior" Soprano". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/janice_soprano.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-09-28.
  80. ^ "Character profile - Tony Blundetto". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/tony_blundetto.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-09-28.
  81. ^ "Character profile - Christopher Moltisanti". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/christopher_moltisanti.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-09-28.
  82. ^ "Character profile - Silvio Dante". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/silvio_dante.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  83. ^ "Character profile - Paulie Walnuts". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/paulie_walnuts.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  84. ^ "Character profile - Big Pussy". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/big_pussy.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  85. ^ "Character profile - Patsy Parisi". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/patsy_parisi.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  86. ^ "Character profile - Furio Giunta". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/furio_giunta.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  87. ^ "Character profile - Bobby Baccala". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/bobby_baccala.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  88. ^ "Character profile - Richie Aprile". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/richie_aprile.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  89. ^ "Character profile - Ralph Cifaretto". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/ralph_cifaretto.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  90. ^ "Character profile - Eugene Pontecorvo". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/eugene_pentacorvo.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  91. ^ "Character profile - Vito Spatafore". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/vito_spadafore.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  92. ^ "Character profile - Hesh Rabkin". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/hesh_rabkin.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  93. ^ "Character profile - Adriana La Cerva". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/adriana_lacerva.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  94. ^ ,"Character profile - Rosalie Aprile". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/rosalie_aprile.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  95. ^ "Character profile - Artie Bucco". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/artie_bucco.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  96. ^ "Character profile - Charmaine Bucco". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/charmaine_bucco.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  97. ^ "Character profile - Johnny Sack". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/johnny_sack.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  98. ^ "Character profile - Phil Leotardo". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/phil_leotardo.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  99. ^ "Character profile - Little Carmine". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/character/little_carmine.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  100. ^ Kelly, David (2002-09-15). "Deconstructing The Sopranos". The New York Times. http://www.crankyeditor.com/Portfolio/Awards%20&%20Press/Deconstructing%20'The%20Sopranos'.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  101. ^ a b c Sepinwall, Alan. The stuff that Tony's dreams are made of, nj.com, March 6, 2006, accessed March 19, 2007.
  102. ^ a b Dehnart, Andy. Real, dream families blend for Tony Soprano, msnbc.com, March 20, 2006, accessed March 19, 2007.
  103. ^ a b Goodman, Tim. A tidy finish? Fahgeddaboutit., San Francisco Chronicle, April 2, 2007, accessed May 24, 2007.
  104. ^ "Pine Barrens". Terence Winter. The Sopranos. HBO. 2001-05-06. No. 11, season 3.
  105. ^ "For All Debts Public and Private". David Chase. The Sopranos. HBO. 2002-09-15. No. 1, season 4.
  106. ^ a b "Cold Cuts". Robin Green, Mitchell Burgess. The Sopranos. HBO. 2004-05-09. No. 10, season 5.
  107. ^ "Amour Fou". Frank Renzulli, David Chase. The Sopranos. HBO. 2001-05-13. No. 12, season 3.
  108. ^ "The Second Coming". Terence Winter. The Sopranos. HBO. 2007-05-20. No. 19, season 6.
  109. ^ "Stage 5". Terence Winter. The Sopranos. HBO. 2007-04-15. No. 14, season 6.
  110. ^ Goldberg, Jeffrey and Capeci, Jerry. Mob Experts on The Sopranos, Week 10, slate.com, May 10, 2004, accessed March 27, 2007.
  111. ^ Stark, Jeff. "Jersey Cases Inspire New Season", Newark Star Ledger, April 5, 2001.
  112. ^ "Ray Liotta Turned Down 'Sopranos'". The Lubbock Avalanche-Journal. 2001-03-15. http://www.lubbockonline.com/stories/031501/ent_031501027.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-30.
  113. ^ Brady, James (2007-11-25). "In Step With...Michael Imperioli". Parade. http://www.parade.com/articles/editions/2007/edition_11-25-2007/In_Step_With...Michael_Imperioli. Retrieved on 2008-08-04.
  114. ^ "Dominic Chianese as Corrado "Junior" Soprano". HBO. http://www.hbo.com/sopranos/cast/actor/dominic_chianese.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-27.
  115. ^ Di Ionno, Mark (2008-06-10). "'The Sopranos' and stereotypes, perfect together". Newark Star-Ledger. http://blog.nj.com/sopranosarchive/2007/06/the_sopranos_and_stereotypes_p.html#more. Retrieved on 2007-07-27.
  116. ^ Phillips, Andrew (2003-02-13). "INTERVIEW: Sopranos' Silvio speaks". GW Hatchet. http://media.www.gwhatchet.com/media/storage/paper332/news/2003/02/13/Arts/Interview.Sopranos.Silvio.Speaks-368766.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-27.
  117. ^ Yacowar, Maurice (2003). The Sopranos on the Couch: Analyzing Television's Greatest Series. Continuum.
  118. ^ Cole, Stephen (2007-06-06). "How The Sopranos changed television". CBC.ca. http://www.cbc.ca/arts/tv/sopranos.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-24.
  119. ^ a b Bondanella, Peter (2004). Hollywood Italians: Dagos, Palookas, Romeos, Wise Guys, and Sopranos. Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 308.
  120. ^ "Sopranos Product Placement Watch", BusinessWeek Online, 2006
  121. ^ "HBO shows use real brands", USA Today, December 12, 2002
  122. ^ "Advertisers find "Sopranos" hard to refuse", Reuters, October 11, 2002
  123. ^ Traister, Rebbeca (2007-09-15). "The best TV show of all time". Salon.com. http://www.salon.com/ent/tv/feature/2007/09/15/best_show. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  124. ^ a b c Poniewozik, James (October 2007). "The Sopranos - The 100 Best TV Shows of All-TIME - TIME". TIME. http://www.time.com/time/specials/2007/article/0,28804,1651341_1659196_1652728,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-14.
  125. ^ Remnick, David (June 2007). "Family Guy". The New Yorker. http://www.newyorker.com/talk/comment/2007/06/04/070604taco_talk_remnick. Retrieved on 2008-07-24.
  126. ^ "TV Guide Names Top 50 Shows". CBS News. 2002-04-26. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2002/04/26/entertainment/main507388.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-02-18.
  127. ^ Matthewman, Scott (2007-03-06). "The 50 greatest TV dramas". The Stage. http://www.thestage.co.uk/tvtoday/2007/03/the_50_greatest_tv_dramas.php. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  128. ^ "The Sopranos - The Complete First Season - Rotten Tomatoes". Rotten Tomatoes. http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/sopranos_the_complete_first_season. Retrieved on 2007-11-27.
  129. ^ Holland, Roger (2007-10-11). "Part 4 - Feasts from the Fringe". PopMatters. http://www.popmatters.com/pm/features/article/49146/part-4-feasts-from-the-fringe/. Retrieved on 2007-11-27.
  130. ^ "âArrested Development,â âSopranosâ win Emmys". Associated Press. 2004-09-20. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/6048792/. Retrieved on 2008-07-24.
  131. ^ "'The Sopranos' Wins Emmy for Best Dramatic Series". FOXNews.com. 2007-09-17. http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,296842,00.html?sPage=fnc/entertainment/tv. Retrieved on 2008-07-30.
  132. ^ a b "Emmy Awards Database". Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. http://cdn.emmys.tv/awards/awardsearch.php. Retrieved on 2008-07-24.
  133. ^ Hannon, Sharron (2000-04-03). "West Wing, Sopranos among Peabody Award winners". University of Georgia. http://www.uga.edu/columns/000403/front4.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-27.
  134. ^ Grossberg, Josh (2001-03-29). ""Sopranos," "West Wing" Peabody'd". E! News. http://de.eonline.com/news/article/index.jsp?uuid=8dd9942d-cd7c-448b-b467-f0bf769f00eb&entry=index. Retrieved on 2008-07-27.
  135. ^ Wolk, Josh (2000-01-23). "Good as Golden". EW.com. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,84940,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-30.
  136. ^ McNary, Dave (2008-01-10). "DGA announces TV nominations". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117978818.html?categoryid=14&cs=1. Retrieved on 2008-07-30.
  137. ^ Susman, Gary (2003-01-23). "Crime Pays". EW.com. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,409194,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-30.
  138. ^ Wyatt, Edward (2008-01-28). "Writers Guild Awards go on despite strike". SFGate. http://www.usatoday.com/life/television/televisionawards/2007-12-12-writers-guild-awards_N.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-30.
  139. ^ "Screen Actors Guild awards glitter". USA Today. 2007-12-13. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/c/a/2008/01/28/MN36UNE61.DTL. Retrieved on 2008-07-30.
  140. ^ Schuppe, Jonathan (2000-12-16). "Essex officials tell 'The Sopranos': Fuhgeddabout filming around here". The Star-Ledger. http://www.nj.com/sopranos/ledger/index.ssf?/sopranos/stories/121600essex.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-31.
  141. ^ Susman, Gary (2002-10-14). "Marching Banned". EW.com. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,364447,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-31.
  142. ^ Mays, Jeffrey C. (2001-05-20). "Italian-American targets stereotypes". The Star-Ledger. http://blog.nj.com/sopranosarchive/2001/05/italianamerican_targets_stereo.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-31.
  143. ^ "The Sopranos - Series 1". Play.com. http://www.play.com/DVD/DVD/4-/481212/The-Sopranos-Series-1/Product.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  144. ^ "The Sopranos - Series 2". Play.com. http://www.play.com/DVD/DVD/4-/481213/The-Sopranos-Series-2/Product.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  145. ^ "The Sopranos - Series 3". Play.com. http://www.play.com/DVD/DVD/4-/481215/The-Sopranos-Series-3/Product.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  146. ^ "The Sopranos: The Complete 4th Season". TVShowsOnDVD.com. 2003-08-02. http://www.tvshowsondvd.com/news/Sopranos/572. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  147. ^ "The Sopranos: The Complete Fifth Seaso". DVDfanatic.com. http://www.dvdfanatic.com/review.php?id=sopranos5. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  148. ^ "The Sopranos - Season 6, Part 1". DVDfanatic.com. http://www.dvdfanatic.com/review.php?id=sopranos61. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.
  149. ^ "The Sopranos - Season 6, Part 2". TVShowsOnDVD.com. 2007-07-29. http://www.tvshowsondvd.com/news/Sopranos/7749. Retrieved on 2007-09-22.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: The
Sopranos  
  * Official Site on HBO.com
  * The Sopranos at the Internet Movie Database
  * The Sopranos at TV.com
  * The Sopranos at the Open Directory Project
  * Sopranos locations and sightings
  * Sopranos music guide
  * Studying 'The Sopranos'
  * The Sopranos: Definitive Explanation of 'The End'

Awards  
Preceded by  
The Practice Golden Globe - Best Television Series - Drama  
2000 Succeeded by  
The West Wing  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series  
The West Wing (2001) Â· The West Wing (2002) Â· The West Wing (2003) Â· The
Sopranos (2004) Â· Lost (2005) Â· 24 (2006) Â· The Sopranos (2007) Â· Mad Men
(2008)  
Complete list: (1951â1975) Â· (1976â2000) Â· (2001âpresent)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

The Sopranos  
Characters

Tony Soprano Â· Dr. Jennifer Melfi Â· Carmela Soprano Â· Christopher
Moltisanti Â· Junior Soprano Â· Meadow Soprano Â· A.J. Soprano Â· Janice
Soprano Â· Silvio Dante Â· Paulie Gualtieri Â· Adriana La Cerva Â· Bobby
"Bacala" Â· Livia Soprano Â· Johnny Sack Â· Vito Spatafore Â· Furio Giunta Â·
"Big Pussy" Bonpensiero Â· Tony Blundetto Â· Ralph Cifaretto Â· "Larry Boy"
Barese Â· Ray Curto Â· Artie Bucco Â· Charmaine Bucco Â· Jackie Aprile, Sr Â·
Jackie Aprile, Jr. Â· Rosalie Aprile Â· Phil Leotardo Â· Hesh Rabkin Â· Richie
Aprile Â· Carmine Lupertazzi Â· Little Carmine Â· Mikey Palmice Â· Patsy
Parisi Â· Benny Fazio Â· Carlo Gervasi Â· Agent Dwight Harris Â· Eugene
Pontecorvo Â· Little Paulie Germani Â· Butch DeConcini Â· Albie Cianflone  
Fictional universe

Soprano crime family Â· Satriale's Pork Store Â· Bada Bing Â· Cleaver Â·
Timeline Â· Family tree Â· FBI  
Production

Episode list Â· Writers and directors Â· David Chase Â· Music Â· Sets and
locations  
Miscellaneous

The Sopranos: Road to Respect Â· Awards  
Category Â· Episodes  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sopranos"

Categories: The Sopranos | HBO network shows | 1990s American television
series | 2000s American television series | 1999 television series debuts |
2007 television series endings | Serial drama television series | Edgar Award
winning works | Peabody Award winners | Television series by Warner Bros.
Television | Television shows set in New Jersey | Television shows set in New
York City

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * GÃ idhlig
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 15:33.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



