
# Netscape

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the web browser produced by this corporation, see Netscape (web browser).

Netscape Communications <IMG>  
Founded 1994  
Headquarters Dulles, Loudoun County, Virginia, USA  
(AOL's headquarters)  
Key people Marc Andreessen and Jim Clark (founders)  
Industry Internet, Software, & Telecommunication  
Products Internet suite  
web browser  
Internet service provider  
web portal  
Employees 10,000  
Parent AOL  
Website Netscape.com  
Netscape Communications (formerly known as Netscape Communications Corporation
and commonly known as Netscape) is a US computer services company, best known
for its web browser. The browser was once dominant in terms of usage share,
but lost most of that share to Internet Explorer during the first browser war.
By the end of 2006, the usage share of Netscape browsers had fallen, from over
90% in the mid 1990s, to less than 1%. Netscape developed the Secure Sockets
Layer Protocol (SSL) used for securing online communication, which is still
widely used.[1]

Netscape stock traded between 1995 and 2003, subsequently as a subsidiary of
AOL LLC. However, it became a holding company following AOL's purchase of
Netscape in 1998. The Netscape brand is still extensively used by AOL. Some
services currently offered under the Netscape brand, other than the web
browser, include a discount Internet service provider and a popular social
news website. As of December 2007, AOL announced it would no longer be
updating the Netscape browser. Tom Drapeau, director of AOL's Netscape Brand,
announced that the company would stop supporting Netscape software products as
of March 1, 2008.[2] The decision met mixed reactions from communities, with
many arguing that the termination of product support is significantly belated.
Internet security site Security Watch stated that a trend of infrequent
security updates for AOL's Netscape cause the browser to become a "security
liability", specifically the 2005-2007 versions, Netscape Browser 8.[3] Asa
Dotzler, one of Firefox's original programmers, greeted the news with "good
riddance" in his blog post, but praised the various members of the Netscape
team over the years for enabling the creation of Mozilla in 1998.[4] Others
protested and petitioned AOL to continue providing vital security fixes to
unknowing or loyal users of its software, as well as protection of a well-
known brand.[5][6][7]

## Contents

  * 1 Netscape Internet Service
    * 1.1 Web Accelerator
  * 2 History
    * 2.1 Early years
    * 2.2 Open sourcing
    * 2.3 Acquisition by America Online
    * 2.4 Disbanding
    * 2.5 Final release of the browser
  * 3 Software
    * 3.1 Classic releases
    * 3.2 Netscape Navigator (versions 0.9â4.08)
    * 3.3 Netscape Communicator (versions 4.0â4.8)
    * 3.4 Mozilla-based releases
      * 3.4.1 Netscape 6 (versions 6.0â6.2.3)
      * 3.4.2 Netscape 7 (versions 7.0â7.2)
    * 3.5 Mozilla Firefox-based releases
      * 3.5.1 Netscape Browser (version 8.0-8.1.3)
      * 3.5.2 Netscape Navigator (version 9.0)
    * 3.6 End of development and support
    * 3.7 Mozilla Thunderbird-based releases
      * 3.7.1 Netscape Messenger 9
  * 4 Product list
  * 5 Internet portals and services
    * 5.1 Netscape.com
    * 5.2 Propeller
    * 5.3 Open Directory Project
    * 5.4 Netscape Search
    * 5.5 Netscape Forum Center
    * 5.6 Other sites
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Netscape Internet Service

<IMG>

<IMG>

Netscape ISP Logo

Netscape ISP is a 56 kbit/s dial-up service offered at $9.95 per month[8]
($6.95 with 12-month commitment). The company serves webpages in a compressed
format to increase effective speeds up to 1300 kbit/s (average 500 kbit/s).
The Internet service provider is run by AOL under the Netscape brand. The low-
cost ISP was officially launched on January 8, 2004.[9] Its main competitor is
NetZero. Netscape ISP's advertising is generally aimed at a younger
demographic, e.g., college students, and people just out of school, as an
affordable way to gain access to the Internet. Additional features can be
added to the service at extra cost such as:

  * PC Anti-virus Protection
  * Advanced Spam Blocker
  * E-mail VirusScan
  * Extra E-mail Storage
  * Extra E-mail Addresses

#### [edit] Web Accelerator

The Web Accelerator is the main feature that sets Netscape's service apart
from others. The accelerator precompresses text at the Server side to
approximately 4% its original size, increasing effective throughput to 1300
kbit/s. The accelerator also precompresses Flash executables and images to
approximately 30% and 12%, respectively. Netscape advertises this as "DSL
speeds over regular phone lines", although such speeds are limited to only web
browsing, not downloads of files.

Another drawback of this approach is a loss in quality, where the graphics
become heavily compacted and smeared, but the speed is dramatically improved
such that web pages load in less than 5 seconds, and the user can manually
choose to view the uncompressed images at any time.

## [edit] History

### [edit] Early years

<IMG>

<IMG>

The logo of Mosaic Communications Corporation and its browser

Netscape was the second company to attempt to capitalize on the (then) nascent
World Wide Web. It was originally founded under the name, Mosaic
Communications Corporation, on April 4, 1994, the brainchild of Jim Clark who
had recruited Marc Andreessen as co-founder and Kleiner Perkins Caufield &
Byers as investors. Clark recruited other early Netscape team members from SGI
and NCSA Mosaic. The company's first product was the web browser, called
Mosaic Netscape 0.9, released on October 13, 1994. This browser was
subsequently renamed Netscape Navigator, and the company took the 'Netscape'
name on November 14, 1994[10] to avoid trademark ownership problems with NCSA,
where the initial Netscape employees had previously created the NCSA Mosaic
web browser. The Mosaic Netscape web browser utilized some NCSA Mosaic code
with NCSA's permission, as noted in the application's "About" dialog box.
Netscape made a very successful IPO on August 9, 1995. The stock was set to be
offered at $14 per share. But, a last-minute decision doubled the initial
offering to $28 per share. The stock's value soared to $75 on the first day of
trading, nearly a record for first-day gain. The company's revenues doubled
every quarter in 1995.[11]

One of Netscape's stated goals was to "level the playing field" among
operating systems by providing a consistent web browsing experience across
them. The Netscape web browser interface was identical on any computer.
Netscape later experimented with prototypes of a web-based system which would
enable users to access and edit their files anywhere across a network, no
matter what computer or operating system they happened to be using. This did
not escape the attention of Microsoft, which viewed the commoditization of
operating systems as a direct threat to its bottom line. It is alleged that
several Microsoft executives visited the Netscape campus in June 1995 to
propose dividing the market (although Microsoft denies this as it would have
breached anti-trust laws), which would have allowed Microsoft to produce web
browser software for Windows while leaving all other operating systems to
Netscape.[12] Netscape refused the proposition.

Microsoft released version 1.0 of Internet Explorer as a part of the Windows
95 Plus Pack add-on. According to former Spyglass developer Eric Sink,
Internet Explorer was based not on NCSA Mosaic as commonly believed, but on a
version of Mosaic developed at Spyglass[13] (which itself was based upon NCSA
Mosaic). Microsoft quickly released several successive versions of Internet
Explorer, bundling them with Windows, never charging for them, financing their
development and marketing with revenues from other areas of the company. This
period of time became known as the browser wars, in which Netscape
Communicator and Internet Explorer added many new features (not always working
correctly) and went through many version numbers (not always in a logical
fashion) in attempts to outdo each other. But Internet Explorer had the upper
hand, as the amount of manpower and capital dedicated to it eventually
surpassed the resources available in Netscape's entire business. By version
3.0, IE was roughly a feature-for-feature equivalent of Netscape Communicator,
and by version 4.0, it was generally considered to be more stable on Windows
than on the Macintosh platform. Microsoft also targeted other Netscape
products with free workalikes, such as the Internet Information Server (IIS),
a web server which was bundled with Windows NT.

Netscape could not compete with this strategy. In fact, it didn't attempt to.
Netscape Navigator was not free to the general public until January 1998,[14]
while Internet Explorer and IIS have always been free or came bundled with an
operating system and/or other applications. Meanwhile, Netscape faced
increasing criticism for the bugs in its products; critics claimed that the
company suffered from 'featuritis' â putting a higher priority on adding new
features than on making them work properly. This was particularly true with
Netscape Navigator 2, which was only on the market for 5 months in early 1996
before being replaced by Netscape Navigator 3. The tide of public opinion,
having once lauded Netscape as the David to Microsoft's Goliath, steadily
turned negative, especially when Netscape experienced its first bad quarter at
the end of 1997 and underwent a large round of layoffs in January 1998. (There
were, however, always users who appreciated Netscape's functionality with
frames and image-saving, and who liked using a non-Microsoft product.)

### [edit] Open sourcing

January 1998 was also the month that Netscape started the open source Mozilla
project. Netscape publicly released the source code of Netscape Communicator
4.0 in the hopes that it would become a popular open source project. It placed
this code under the Netscape Public License, which was similar to the GNU
General Public License but allowed Netscape to continue to publish proprietary
work containing the publicly released code. However, after having released the
Communicator 4.0 code this way, Netscape proceeded to work on Communicator 4.5
which was focused on improving email and enterprise functionality. It
eventually became clear that the Communicator 4.0 browser was too difficult to
develop, and open source development was halted on this codebase. Instead, the
open source development shifted to a next generation browser built from
scratch. Utilizing the newly built Gecko layout engine, this browser had a
much more modular architecture than Communicator 4.0 and was therefore easier
to develop with a large number of programmers. It also included an XML user
interface language named XUL that allowed single development of a user
interface that ran on Windows, Macintosh, and Linux.

The United States Department of Justice filed an antitrust case against
Microsoft in May 1998. Netscape was not a plaintiff in the case, though its
executives were subpoenaed and it contributed much material to the case,
including the entire contents of the 'Bad Attitude' internal discussion
forum.[15] In October 1998, Netscape acquired web directory site NewHoo for
the sum of $1 million, renamed it the Open Directory Project, and released its
database under an open content license.

### [edit] Acquisition by America Online

<IMG>

This section is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline
citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies.
(October 2008)  
<IMG>

Netscape logo as a throbber

America Online (AOL) on November 24, 1998 announced it would acquire Netscape
Communications in a tax-free stock-swap valued at US$4.2 billion at the time
of the announcement. This merger was ridiculed by many who believed that the
two corporate cultures could not possibly mesh; one of its most prominent
critics was longtime Netscape developer Jamie Zawinski.[15][16] The
acquisition was seen as a way for AOL to gain a bargaining chip against
Microsoft, to let it become less dependent on the Internet Explorer web
browser. Others believed that AOL was interested in Netcenter, or Netscape's
web properties, which drew some of the highest traffic worldwide. Eventually,
Netscape's server products and its Professional Services group became part of
iPlanet, a joint marketing and development alliance between AOL and Sun
Microsystems. On November 14, 2000, AOL released Netscape 6, based on the
Mozilla 0.6 source code. (Version 5 was skipped.) Unfortunately, Mozilla 0.6
was far from being stable yet, and so the effect of Netscape 6 was to further
drive people away from the Netscape brand. It was not until August 2001 that
Netscape 6.1 appeared, based on Mozilla 0.9.2 which was significantly more
robust. A year later came Netscape 7.0, based on the Mozilla 1.0 core.

### [edit] Disbanding

<IMG>

<IMG>

Netscape logo used from 1994 until 2002

After the Microsoft antitrust case found that Microsoft held and had abused
monopoly power, AOL filed a suit against it for damages.[16] This suit was
settled in May 2003 when Microsoft paid US $750 million to AOL and agreed to
share some technologies, including granting AOL a license to use and
distribute Internet Explorer royalty-free for seven years.[17][18] This was
considered to be the death knell for Netscape.

On July 15, 2003, Time Warner (formerly AOL Time Warner) disbanded Netscape.
Most of the programmers were laid-off, and the Netscape logo was removed from
the building. However, the Netscape 7.2 web browser (developed in-house rather
than with Netscape staff) was released by AOL on August 18, 2004.[19] Red Hat
announced on September 30, 2004 that it had acquired large portions of the
Netscape Enterprise Suite and was planning to convert them into an open source
product to be bundled with Red Hat Enterprise Linux.[20] On June 1, 2005, Red
Hat released Fedora Directory Server.

On October 12, 2004, the popular developer website Netscape DevEdge was shut
down by AOL. DevEdge was an important resource for Internet-related
technologies, maintaining definitive documentation on the Netscape browser,
documentation on associated technologies like HTML and JavaScript, and popular
articles written by industry and technology leaders such as Danny Goodman.
Some content from DevEdge has been republished at the Mozilla website.

### [edit] Final release of the browser

<IMG>

<IMG>

Netscape logo 2005-2007, still used in some portals

The Netscape brand name continued to be used extensively. The company once
again had its own programming staff devoted to the development and support for
the series of web browsers.[21] Additionally, Netscape also maintained the
Propeller web portal, which was a popular social-news site, similar to Digg,
which was given a new look in June 2006. AOL marketed a discount ISP service
under the Netscape brand name.

A new version of the Netscape browser, Netscape Navigator 9, based on Firefox
2, was released in October 2007. It featured a sleek green and grey interface.
In November 2007, IE had 77.4% of the browser market, Firefox 16.0% and
Netscape 0.6%, according to Net Applications, an Internet metrics firm.[22] On
December 28, 2007, AOL announced that on February 1, 2008 it would drop
support for the Netscape web browser and would no longer develop new releases.
The date was later extended to March 1[23] to allow a major security update
and to add a tool to assist users in migrating to other browsers. These
additional features were included in the final version of Netscape Navigator 9
(version 9.0.0.6), released on February 20, 2008.

## [edit] Software

Main article: Netscape (web browser)

### [edit] Classic releases

### [edit] Netscape Navigator (versions 0.9â4.08)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Netscape Navigator 2.02

<IMG>

<IMG>

32-bit Netscape 0.91 running on 64-bit Windows Vista.

Main article: Netscape Navigator

Netscape Navigator was Netscape's web browser from versions 1.0â4.8. The
first beta versions were released in 1994 and were called Mosaic and later
Mosaic Netscape. Then, a legal challenge from the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications (makers of NCSA Mosaic), which many of Netscape's
founders used to develop, led to the name Netscape Navigator. The company's
name also changed from Mosaic Communications Corporation to Netscape
Communications Corporation.

The browser was easily the most advanced available and so was an instant
success, becoming market leader while still in beta. Netscape's feature-count
and market share continued to grow rapidly after version 1.0 was released.
Version 2.0 added a full email reader called Netscape Mail, thus transforming
Netscape from a mere web browser to an Internet suite. The main distinguishing
feature of the email client was its ability to display HTML. During this
period, the suite was called Netscape Navigator.

Version 3.0 of Netscape (the first beta was codenamed "Atlas") was the first
to face any serious competition in the form of Microsoft Internet Explorer
3.0. But Netscape easily remained the number one browser for the time being.

Netscape also released a Gold version that incorporated JavaScript, RSA
security and an Apple Inc. QuickTime decoder.

### [edit] Netscape Communicator (versions 4.0â4.8)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Netscape Communicator 4.61 for OS/2 Warp

Main article: Netscape Communicator

Netscape 4 addressed the problem of Netscape Navigator being used as both the
name of the suite and the browser contained within it by renaming the suite to
Netscape Communicator. After releasing five preview releases from 1996â1997,
Netscape released the final version of Netscape Communicator in June 1997.
This new version, more or less based on Netscape Navigator 3 Code, updated and
added new features. The new suite was successful, despite increasing
competition from Internet Explorer (IE) 4.0 (which had a more advanced HTML
engine) and problems with the outdated browser core. IE was slow and unstable
on the Mac platform until version 4.5. The Communicator suite was made up of
Netscape Navigator, Netscape Mail & Newsgroups, Netscape Address Book and
Netscape Composer (an HTML editor).

In January 1998, Netscape Communications Corporation announced that all future
versions of its software would be available free of charge and developed by an
open source community, Mozilla. Netscape Communicator 5.0 was announced
(codenamed "Grommit"). However, its release was greatly delayed, and meanwhile
there were newer versions of Internet Explorer, starting with version 4. Those
had more features than the old Netscape version, including better support of
HTML 4, CSS, DOM, and ECMAScript. The more advanced Internet Explorer 5.0
became the market leader.

In October 1998, Netscape Communicator 4.5 was released. It featured various
functionality improvements, especially in the Mail and Newsgroups component,
but did not update the browser core, whose functionality was essentially
identical to that of version 4.08. One month later, Netscape Communications
Corporation was bought by AOL. In November, work on Netscape 5.0 was canceled
in favor of developing a completely new program from scratch.

### [edit] Mozilla-based releases

#### [edit] Netscape 6 (versions 6.0â6.2.3)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Netscape 6.1

Main article: Netscape 6

In 1998, an informal group called the Mozilla Organization was formed and
largely funded by Netscape (the vast majority of programmers working on the
code were paid by Netscape) to co-ordinate the development of Netscape 5
(codenamed "Gromit"), which would be based on the Communicator source code.
However, the aging Communicator code proved difficult to work with and the
decision was taken to scrap Netscape 5 and re-write the source code. The re-
written source code was in the form of the Mozilla web browser, which, with a
few additions, Netscape 6 was based on.

This decision meant that Netscape's next major version was severely delayed.
In the meantime, Netscape was taken over by AOL who, acting under pressure
from the Web Standards Project, forced its new division to release Netscape
6.0 in 2000. The suite again consisted of Netscape Navigator and the other
Communicator components, with the addition of a built-in AOL Instant Messenger
client, Netscape Instant Messenger. However, it was clear that Netscape 6 was
not yet ready for release and it flopped badly. It was based on Mozilla 0.6,
which was not ready to be used by the general public yet due to many serious
bugs that would cause it to crash often or render web pages slowly. Later
versions of Netscape 6 were much improved (especially 6.2.x was regarded as a
good release), but the browser still struggled to make an impact on a
disappointed community.

#### [edit] Netscape 7 (versions 7.0â7.2)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Netscape 7.2

Main article: Netscape (version 7)

Netscape 7.0 (based on Mozilla 1.0.1) was released in August 2002 was a direct
continuation of Netscape 6 with very similar components. It picked up a few
users, but was still very much a minority browser. It did, however, come with
the popular Radio@Netscape Internet radio client. AOL had decided to
deactivate Mozilla's popup-blocker functionality in Netscape 7.0, which
created an outrage in the community. AOL learned the lesson for Netscape 7.01
and allowed Netscape to reinstate the popup-blocker. Netscape also introduced
a new AOL-free-version (without the usual AOL addons) of the browser suite.
Netscape 7.1 (codenamed "Buffy" and based on Mozilla 1.4) was released in June
2003.

In 2003, AOL closed down its Netscape division and laid-off or re-assigned all
of Netscape's employees. Mozilla. org continued, however, as the independent
Mozilla Foundation, taking on many of Netscape's ex-employees. AOL continued
to develop Netscape in-house, but, due to there being no staff committed to
it, improvements were minimal. One year later, in August 2004, the last
version based on Mozilla was released: Netscape 7.2, based on Mozilla 1.7.2.

After an official poll posted on Netscape's community support board in late
2006, speculation has arisen of the Netscape 7 series of suites being fully
supported and updated by Netscape's in-house development team once more,
including major bug fixes and security issues.[24][25][26]

### [edit] Mozilla Firefox-based releases

#### [edit] Netscape Browser (version 8.0-8.1.3)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Netscape Browser 8.1.3

Main article: Netscape Browser

Between 2005 and 2007, Netscape's releases became known as Netscape Browser.
AOL chose to base Netscape Browser on the relatively successful Mozilla
Firefox, a re-written version of Mozilla produced by the Mozilla Foundation.
This release is not a full Internet suite as before, but is solely a web
browser. Other controversial decisions include the browser's being made only
for Microsoft Windows and its featuring both the Gecko rendering engine of
previous releases and the Trident engine used in Internet Explorer. AOL's
acquisition of Netscape years ago made it less of a surprise when the company
laid off the Netscape team and outsourced development to Mercurial
Communications. Netscape Browser 8.1.3 was released on April 2, 2007, and
included general bug fixes identified in versions 8.0-8.1.2[27][28]

#### [edit] Netscape Navigator (version 9.0)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Netscape Navigator 9.0

Main article: Netscape Navigator 9

Netscape confirmed on 23 January 2007 that Netscape Browser versions 8.0-8.1.2
was to be succeeded by a new stand-alone browser release, Netscape Navigator
9. Its features were said to include newsfeed support and become more
integrated with the Propeller Internet portal,[29] alongside more enhanced
methods of discussion, submission and voting on web pages.[30] It also sees
the browser return to multi-platform support across Windows, Linux and Mac OS
X.[31] Like Netscape version 8.x, the new release was be based upon the
popular Mozilla Firefox (version 2.0), and supposedly have full support of all
Firefox add-ons and plugins, some of which Netscape is already providing.[32]
Also for the first time since 2004, the browser was produced in-house with its
own programming staff.[33] A beta of the program was first released on 5 June
2007.[34] The final version was released on October 15, 2007.

### [edit] End of development and support

AOL officially announced [35] that it is no longer supporting Netscape
Navigator as of 1 March, 2008, and recommended that its users download either
the Flock or Firefox browsers, both of which were based on the same
technology.

### [edit] Mozilla Thunderbird-based releases

#### [edit] Netscape Messenger 9

<IMG>

<IMG>

Netscape Messenger 9.0a1

Main article: Netscape Messenger 9

On June 11, 2007, Netscape announced Netscape Mercury, a stand-alone Email /
News Client that was to accompany Navigator 9. Mercury was based on Mozilla
Thunderbird.[36] The product was later renamed Netscape Messenger 9, and an
alpha version was released. In December 2007, AOL announced it was canceling
Netscape's development of Messenger 9 as well as Navigator 9.

## [edit] Product list

<IMG>

<IMG>

Installation disk of Netscape 2.0

Netscape's initial product line consisted of:

  * Netscape Navigator web browser for Windows, Macintosh, OS/2, Unix, and Linux
  * Netsite Communications web server, with a web-based configuration interface
  * Netsite Commerce web server, simply the Communications server with SSL (https) added
  * Netscape Proxy Server

Later Netscape products included:

  * Netscape Personal Edition (the browser along with PPP software and an account creation wizard to sign up with an ISP)
  * Netscape Communicator (a suite which included Navigator along with tools for mail, news, calendar, VoIP, and composing web pages, and was bundled with AOL Instant Messenger and RealAudio)
  * Netscape FastTrack and Enterprise web servers
  * Netscape Collabra Server, a NNTP news server acquired in a purchase of Collabra Software, Inc.
  * Netscape Directory Server, an LDAP server
  * Netscape Messaging Server, an IMAP and POP mail server
  * Netscape Certificate Server, for issuing SSL certificates
  * Netscape Calendar Server, for group scheduling
  * Netscape Compass Server, a search engine and spider
  * Netscape Application Server, for designing web applications
  * Netscape Publishing System, for running a commercial site with news articles and charging users per access
  * Netscape Xpert Servers 
    * ECxpert - a server for EDI message exchange
    * SellerXpert - B to B Commerce Engine
    * BuyerXpert - eProcurement Engine
    * BillerXpert - Online Bill Paying Engine
    * TradingXpert - HTML EDI transaction frontend
    * CommerceXpert - Online Retail Store engine
  * Radio@Netscape and Radio@Netscape Plus

Netscape created the JavaScript web page scripting language. It also pioneered
the development of "push technology," which effectively allowed web sites to
send regular updates of information (weather, stock updates, package tracking,
etc.) directly to a user's desktop (aka "webtop"); Netscape's implementation
of this was named Netcaster.[37] Unfortunately, businesses quickly recognized
the use of push technology to deliver ads to users, and annoyed users turned
off the feature, so Netcaster was short-lived.

Netscape was notable for its cross-platform efforts. Its client software
continued to be made available for Windows (3.1, 95, 98, NT), Macintosh,
Linux, OS/2, BeOS, and many versions of Unix including DEC, Sun Solaris, BSDI,
IRIX, IBM AIX, and HP-UX. Its server software generally was only available for
Unix and Windows NT, though some of its servers were made available on Linux,
and a version of Netscape FastTrack Server was made available for Windows
95/98. Today, most of Netscape's server offerings live on as the Sun Java
System, formerly under the Sun ONE branding. Although Netscape Browser 8 was
Windows only, multi-platform support exists in the Netscape Navigator 9 series
of browsers.[38]

## [edit] Internet portals and services

### [edit] Netscape.com

Netscape always drove lots of traffic from various links included in the
browser menus to its web properties. Some say it was very late to leverage
this traffic for what would become the start of the major online portal wars.
When it did, Netcenter, the new name for its notorious
http://home.netscape.com site entered the race with Yahoo!, Infoseek, and MSN,
which Google would only join years later.

Netscape.com is currently an AOL Netscape-branded mirror duplicate of the
AOL.com portal, replacing the former Social News website in September 2007. It
features facilities such as news, sports, horoscopes, dating, movies, music
and more.

The change has come to much criticism amongst many site users, effectively the
site becoming an AOL clone and simply re-directing to regional AOL portals in
some areas across the globe. Netscape's exclusive features, such as the
Netscape Blog, Netscape NewsQuake, Netscape Navigator, My Netscape and
Netscape Community pages, are less accessible from the AOL Netscape designed
portal and in some countries not accessible at all without providing a full
URL or completing an Internet search.[39]

The new AOL Netscape site was originally previewed in August 2007 before
moving the existing site in September 2007.[40] CompuServe's website,
compuserve.com, is similar to the original generic Netscape portal used prior
to June 2006.

### [edit] Propeller

<IMG>

<IMG>

Propeller logo

Main article: Propeller.com

Netscape also operates the site Propeller, which is a social news aggregator,
similar to Digg, and formally known as Netscape.com between June 2006 and
September 2007.

Revised in late 2007, propeller.com has been re-released and the use of the
new social structure has spawned over 1,000,000 pages within a 2.5 month
period.

### [edit] Open Directory Project

Main article: Open Directory Project

The Open Directory Project (ODP), also known as dmoz (from
directory.mozilla.org, its original domain name), is a multilingual open
content directory of World Wide Web links owned by Netscape that is
constructed and maintained by a community of volunteer editors.

### [edit] Netscape Search

Netscape operates a search engine, Netscape Search, powered by AOL Search.
Another version of Netscape Search can be found at netscape.com/search, which
has since been incorporated into Propeller.

### [edit] Netscape Forum Center

Netscape also has a wide variety of community-based forums within Netscape
Forum Center, including its browser's community support board. To post on the
forums, users must possess an AOL Screenname account in which to sign in,
referred to within the site as the Netscape Network. The same service is also
available through Compuserve Forum Center.

### [edit] Other sites

Netscape also operates a number of country-specific portals, including
Netscape Canada, the Netscape UK, Netscape Germany among others.

The Netscape Blog is written by Netscape employees discussing the latest on
Netscape products and services.

Netscape NewsQuake (formally Netscape Reports) is Netscape's news and opinion
blog, including video clips and discussions.

## [edit] See also

  * Mozilla
  * SeaMonkey
  * The Book of Mozilla
  * Code Rush, a 1998 documentary about Netscape engineers.
  * Radio@Netscape

## [edit] References

  1. ^ History of SSL at IBM.com
  2. ^ "The Netscape Archive". http://browser.netscape.com/. Retrieved on 2008-05-24.
  3. ^ "Netscape Death is long overdue, Good for Security". http://securitywatch.eweek.com/browsers/netscape_death_is_long_overdue_good_for_security_1.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-02.
  4. ^ "it's about time. r.i.p. netscape browser". http://weblogs.mozillazine.org/asa/archives/2007/12/its_about_time.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-02.
  5. ^ "Save Netscape Petition". http://www.savenetscape.com. Retrieved on 2008-01-02.
  6. ^ "Netscape Community - Online Petition for the Support of NN". http://community.netscape.com/n/pfx/forum.aspx?tsn=1&nav=messages&webtag=ws-nscpbrowser&tid=10422. Retrieved on 2008-01-02.
  7. ^ "Save Netscape!". http://www.savenetscape.tk. Retrieved on 2008-01-02.
  8. ^ "GetNetscape Home Page". http://www.getnetscape.com/index.adp. Retrieved on 2008-03-20.
  9. ^ "Netscape Launches Low-Cost Internet Access Service". http://www.timewarner.com/corp/newsroom/pr/0,20812,670188,00.html.
  10. ^ "Mosaic Communications changes name to "Netscape Communications Corporation"". Netscape Communications Corporation. http://www.holgermetzger.de/netscape/NetscapeCommunicationsNewsRelease.htm. Retrieved on 2006-09-14.
  11. ^ David Sheff. "Going Public as Netscape Did, before making a dime in profits". Wired 8.08. Lycos. http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/8.08/loudcloud.html?pg=4. Retrieved on 2006-07-14.
  12. ^ "Government alleges illegal campaign by Microsoft". http://www.pub.umich.edu/daily/1998/oct/10-20-98/news/news14.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-14.
  13. ^ "Memoirs from the Browser Wars". http://biztech.ericsink.com/Browser_Wars.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-14.
  14. ^ Alex Lash. "Netscape cuts prices on retail products". C-Net. http://www.news.com/2100-1001-207681.html?legacy=cnet. Retrieved on 2008-02-23.
  15. ^ "Microsoft Subpoenas Bad Attitude". http://www.wired.com/news/politics/0,1283,14743,00.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-14.
  16. ^ "AOL's Netscape Sues Microsoft". http://news.com.com/2100-1001-820227.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-14.
  17. ^ "Microsoft to pay AOL $750 Million". http://news.com.com/2100-1032-1011296.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-14.
  18. ^ "Is this the end of Netscape?". http://news.com.com/2100-1032_3-1011356.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-14.
  19. ^ "Netscape Internet Software Updated". http://www.pcpro.co.uk/news/news_story.php?id=62001. Retrieved on 2006-07-14.
  20. ^ http://slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=04/09/30/169253
  21. ^ UFAQ. org - "Announcing Netscape 9" by Jay Garcia Retrieved on 2007-02-05
  22. ^ Gonsalves, Antone (December 28, 2007). "AOL Kills Netscape's Future, Leaves Firefox to Battle IE". Informationweek.com. CMP Media LLC. http://www.informationweek.com/news/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=205204433. Retrieved on 2007-12-29.
  23. ^ Tom Drapeau. "End of Support for Netscape web browsers". Netscape Blog. http://blog.netscape.com/2007/12/28/end-of-support-for-netscape-web-browsers/. Retrieved on 2007-12-28.
  24. ^ Netscape Community Announcement - Netscape 7.2 Retrieved on 2007-02-08
  25. ^ Netscape Community poll - Should Netscape continue to update 7.2? Retrieved on 2007-02-08
  26. ^ Mozillazine - Netscape 9 announced Retrieved on 2007-02-08
  27. ^ Netscape Community - Netscape 8.1.3 Retrieved on 2007-02-08
  28. ^ Netscape Community - Netscape 8.1.3 released Retrieved on 2007-04-02
  29. ^ Netscape 9.0 confirmed on Netscape's community support board Retrieved on 2007-01-24
  30. ^ Netscape 9 - 20 February Announcement Retrieved on 2007-02-20
  31. ^ Netscape 9.0 30- January 07 announcement Retrieved on 2007-01-30
  32. ^ Netscape 9 - 6 February 2007 announcement Retrieved on 2007-02-06
  33. ^ Netscape announces cross-platform Netscape 9 to be developed in-house - Mozillazine Retrieved on 2007-02-05
  34. ^ Netscape 9.0b1 released Retrieved on 06-05-2007
  35. ^ Netscape 9 Users: Time to Flock or Firefox - The Netscape Blog
  36. ^ Netscape Mercury in progress Retrieved on 06-011-2007
  37. ^ http://www.catdancers.com/webmags/webrevu/1997/04_18/developers/04_18_97_2.html
  38. ^ See reference 15
  39. ^ Netscape Community responses. Retrieved on 20 September 2007
  40. ^ New Netscape Portal - Netscape Community Retrieved on 14 August 2007

## [edit] External links

  * Netscape.com
  * Netscape Navigator
  * Netscape Browser Archive
  * Complete Netscape FTP Archive
  * Silly Dog's Netscape Browser Archive
  * Netscape Forum Center
  * Propeller.com
  * Netscape ISP home page
  * Netscape Community
  * The Netscape Unofficial FAQ
  * Netscape Version Guide
  * A list of key events in Netscape's history
  * Book of Mozilla, a portal for former Netscape employees
  * Netscape Blog
  * Mosaic Communications Corporation

v â¢ d â¢ e

Time Warner Inc.  
Board of directors

Herbert Allison Â· Jim Barksdale Â· Steve Bollenbach Â· Jeffrey Bewkes Â·
Frank Caufield Â· Robert Clark Â· Mathias DÃ¶pfner Â· Jessica Einhorn Â·
Reuben Mark Â· Michael Miles Â· Ken Novack Â· Richard Parsons Â· Deborah
Wright  
AOL

AIM Â· Bebo Â· CompuServe Â· In2TV Â· MapQuest Â· Mirabilis (ICQ) Â· Moviefone
Â· Netscape Â· Nullsoft (Winamp)  Â· Singingfish Â· Sphere Â· TMZ.com Â·
Weblogs, Inc.  
Home Box Office

HBO (Multiplex) Â· HBO Films Â· Cinemax (Multiplex)  
Time Inc.

All You Â· Coastal Living Â· Cooking Light Â· Entertainment Weekly Â· Essence
Â· Fortune Â· Fortune Small Business Â· Golf Â· Health Â· In Style Â· IPC
Media Â· Life Â· Money Â· NME Â· People Â· People en EspaÃ±ol Â· Real Simple
Â· Southern Living Â· Sports Illustrated Â· Sports Illustrated for Kids Â·
Sunset Â· TIME Â· TIME for Kids Â· This Old House Â· Wallpaper*  
Turner Broadcasting

Related articles  
Warner Bros.

Related articles  
Annual Revenue: $43.6 billion USD (â²4% FY 2005) Â· Employees: 87,850
(â²2,950 FY 2005) Â· Stock Symbol: NYSE: TWX Â· Website: timewarner.com  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Netscape  
Browsing software

Netscape Navigator Â· Netscape Communicator Â· Netscape 6 Â· Netscape 7 Â·
Netscape Browser Â· Netscape Navigator 9  
E-mail clients

Netscape Mail & Newsgroups Â· Netscape Messenger 9  
Other components

Netscape Composer  
Server software

Netscape Enterprise Server Â· Netscape Application Server Â· Netscape Server
Application Programming Interface  
Web services

Netscape.com Â· Propeller.com Â· Open Directory Project Â· Netscape ISP  
People

Eric J. Bina Â· James H. Clark Â· Brendan Eich Â· Jamie Zawinski Â· Marc
Andreessen Â· Eric A. Meyer  
See also

Gecko Â· Mariner Â· Netscape 5 Â· Netscape Public License Â· Mozilla Â· AOL  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Netscape"

Categories: Netscape | Companies established in 1994 | AOL | Defunct computer
companies of the United States

Hidden categories: Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | All
articles with unsourced statements

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 21:31 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



