
# Batman Begins

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the film. For the video game, see Batman Begins (video
game).

Batman Begins  
<IMG>  
Directed by Christopher Nolan  
Produced by Emma Thomas  
Larry J. Franco  
Charles Roven  
Written by Screenplay:  
Christopher Nolan  
David S. Goyer  
Story:  
David S. Goyer  
Comic Book:  
Bob Kane  
Bill Finger  
Starring Christian Bale  
Michael Caine  
Liam Neeson  
Katie Holmes  
Gary Oldman  
Cillian Murphy  
Morgan Freeman  
Tom Wilkinson  
Rutger Hauer  
Ken Watanabe  
Music by Hans Zimmer  
James Newton Howard  
Cinematography Wally Pfister  
Editing by Lee Smith  
Studio Legendary Pictures  
Syncopy Films  
DC Comics  
Distributed by Warner Bros.  
Release date(s) June 15, 2005  
Running time 140 min.  
Country United States  
Language English  
Budget $150 million  
Gross revenue Domestic:  
$205,343,774  
Worldwide:  
$371,853,783  
Followed by The Dark Knight  
Batman Begins is a 2005 superhero film based on the fictional DC Comics
character Batman, directed by Christopher Nolan. It stars Christian Bale as
Batman, along with Michael Caine, Gary Oldman, Liam Neeson, Katie Holmes,
Cillian Murphy, Morgan Freeman, Ken Watanabe, Tom Wilkinson, and Rutger Hauer.
The film reboots the Batman film series, telling the origin story of the
character and begins with Bruce Wayne's initial fear of bats, the death of his
parents, and his journey to becoming Batman. It draws inspiration from classic
comic book storylines such as Batman: The Man Who Falls, Batman: Year One, and
Batman: The Long Halloween.

After a series of unsuccessful projects to resurrect Batman on screen
following the 1997 critical failure of Batman & Robin, Nolan and David S.
Goyer began work on the film in early 2003 and aimed for a darker and more
realistic tone, with humanity and realism being the basis of the film. The
goal was to get the audience to care for both Batman and Bruce Wayne. The
film, which was primarily shot in England and Chicago, relied on traditional
stunts and miniatures â computer-generated imagery was used minimally. A new
Batmobile (called the Tumbler) and a more mobile Batsuit were both created
specifically for the film.

Batman Begins was critically and commercially successful. The film opened on
June 15, 2005 in the United States and Canada in 3,858 theaters. It grossed
US$48 million in its opening weekend, eventually grossing $370 million
worldwide. The film received an 84% overall approval rating from Rotten
Tomatoes. Critics noted that fear was a common theme throughout the film, and
remarked that it had a darker tone compared to previous Batman films. A sequel
titled The Dark Knight was released in July 2008 and also saw the return of
both Nolan and Bale to the franchise. The film has also popularized the notion
of reboots in Hollywood. The film grossed $496,853,783 in both DVD and box
office sales.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Plot
  * 2 Cast
  * 3 Production
    * 3.1 Development
    * 3.2 Filming
    * 3.3 Design
      * 3.3.1 Batmobile
      * 3.3.2 Batsuit
    * 3.4 Special effects
    * 3.5 Soundtrack
  * 4 Themes
  * 5 Reception
    * 5.1 Reviews
    * 5.2 Box office
    * 5.3 Home media
    * 5.4 Awards
  * 6 Impact
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Plot

Eight-year-old Bruce Wayne falls into a well, where he encounters a swarm of
bats. Later, he accompanies his parents to a production of Mefistofele, which
features actors dressed as bats. Having developed a fear of bats, he urges his
father to leave the opera. Outside the theater, Joe Chill mugs and kills
Bruce's parents. Although Chill is later arrested, Bruce blames himself for
his parents' murders.

Fourteen years later, Bruce returns to Gotham City from Princeton University,
intent on killing Chill, whose prison sentence is being suspended in exchange
for testifying against mobster Carmine Falcone. Before he can act, however,
one of Falcone's assassins kills Chill. Bruce tells his childhood friend
Rachel Dawes about his plan; Appalled, Rachel tells him that his father would
be ashamed of him. Bruce confronts Falcone, who tells him that he is ignorant
of the nature of crime, so Bruce decides to travel the world to understand the
criminal mind. He is detained for theft in a Bhutanese prison, where he meets
Henri Ducard. Ducard invites Bruce to join an elite vigilante group, the
League of Shadows, led by Ra's al Ghul. Bruce is freed and travels to a
mountaintop to begin his training with the League. Bruce overcomes his
childhood fear of bats in the process. When he is ordered to execute a
criminal and learns of Ra's intention to destroy Gotham, he refuses and
escapes by lighting the League's temple on fire, killing Ra's in the process.
Bruce rescues an unconscious Ducard from the wreckage and leaves him at a
village.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bruce Wayne is instructed to gather this blue flower. They are the source of
the fear-inducing hallucinogenic compound used by Scarecrow to taint Gotham's
water supply.

After seven years of being abroad, Bruce returns to a Gotham City ruled by
Falcone, and plots his war against the city's corrupt system. He seeks the
help of Rachel, now an assistant district attorney, and police sergeant Jim
Gordon, who consoled him after his parents' murder. After reestablishing his
connections to Wayne Enterprises, Bruce acquires, with the help of former
board member Lucius Fox, a prototype armored car and an experimental armored
suit. In his first night, he disrupts a drug shipment, and leaves Falcone tied
to a searchlight, forming a makeshift Bat-Signal. He also disrupts an
assassination attempt on Rachel, leaving her with evidence against a judge on
Falcone's payroll. While investigating the drugs in the shipment, Batman is
stunned by Dr. Jonathan Crane (Cillian Murphy), an Arkham Asylum psychiatrist
on Falcone's payroll, who sprays him with a powerful hallucinogen. Bruce's
butler Alfred Pennyworth rescues him, using an anti-toxin developed by Fox to
save him. Crane later poisons Rachel after showing her that the toxin, which
is lethal in vapor form, is being piped into the city water supply. Batman
saves her and attacks Crane with his own poison. When the police arrive at
Arkham to arrest Crane, Batman escapes with Rachel in the Batmobile. After
administering the antidote to her in the Batcave, he gives her two vials of it
for Gordon â one for inoculating himself and the other for mass production.

Later at Wayne Manor, Bruce is confronted at his birthday celebration by a
group of League of Shadows ninjas led by Ducard, who reveals himself to be the
real Ra's al Ghul, and that the man killed earlier was a decoy. Ra's, who had
been conspiring with Crane the entire time, plans to destroy Gotham by
distributing the toxin via the city's water supply, and vaporizing it with a
microwave-emitter stolen from Wayne Enterprises. Bruce dismisses his guests by
insulting them while pretending to be drunk, and fights briefly with Ra's
while the League set fire to the Manor. At the last minute, Bruce escapes the
inferno with Alfred's help. Batman arrives at the Narrows section of Gotham to
aid the police in battling psychotic criminalsâincluding Crane, now calling
himself "Scarecrow"âwhom the League set free. Rachel is briefly confronted
by Crane, but quickly wards him off with a taser before being chased by more
inmates. After saving her, Batman reveals his identity to her, and leaves
Gordon in control of the Batmobile to stop the elevated train used to
transport the weapon to the city's central water-hub at Wayne Tower. Batman
battles Ra's aboard the train, then escapes just as Gordon topples the
elevated line using the Batmobile's autocannons, leaving Ra's to crash to the
ground and perish in the explosion.

Following the battle, Batman becomes a public hero. Bruce Wayne gains control
of Wayne Enterprises and installs Fox as the new CEO. However, he is unable to
hold onto Rachel, who cannot reconcile her love for Bruce with his dual life
as Batman. Newly-promoted Lieutenant Gordon unveils a Bat-Signal for Batman.
Gordon mentions that they will have their hands full finding all of the
psychopaths released from Arkham by Ra's, and in particular notes a criminal
who also has "a taste for the theatrical" and leaves Joker playing cards at
all of his crime scenes. Batman promises to investigate it, and disappears
into the night.

## [edit] Cast

Christian Bale as Bruce Wayne / Batman: A billionaire industrialist whose
parents were killed by a mugger when he was eight years old. Traveling the
world for several years to seek the means to fight injustice, he returns to
Gotham. At night, Bruce becomes Batman, Gotham City's vigilante protector.
Bale was cast on September 11, 2003,[2] having expressed interest in playing
Batman since Darren Aronofsky was planning his own film adaptation.[3] Nolan
was also considering Billy Crudup, Jake Gyllenhaal, Hugh Dancy, Joshua
Jackson, Eion Bailey and Cillian Murphy for the role.[2] Bale felt the
previous films underused Batman's character, overplaying the villains
instead.[4] To best pose as Batman, Bale studied graphic novels and
illustrations of the superhero.[5]

Director Nolan said of Bale, "He has exactly the balance of darkness and light
that we were looking for."[6] Goyer stated that while some actors could play a
great Bruce Wayne or a great Batman, Bale could portray both radically
different personalities.[7] Bale described the part as playing four
characters: the raging Batman persona; the shallow playboy faÃ§ade Bruce uses
to ward off suspicion; the vengeful young man; and the older, angrier Bruce
who is discovering his purpose in life.[8] Bale's dislike of his costume,
which heated up regularly, helped him get into a necessarily foul mood. He
said, "Batman's meant to be fierce, and you become a beast in that suit, as
Batman should be â not a man in a suit, but a different creature."[5]

Since he had lost a great deal of weight in preparation for his role in The
Machinist, Bale hired a personal trainer to help him gain 100 pounds (45 kg)
in the span of only a couple of months to help him physically prepare for the
role. He first went well over the weight required and created concern over
whether he'd look right for the part. Bale recognized that his large physique
was not appropriate for Batman, who relies on speed and strategy. He lost the
excess weight by the time filming began.[7] The role of Bruce Wayne at age
eight was portrayed by Gus Lewis.[9]

Michael Caine as Alfred Pennyworth: The trusted butler to Bruce Wayne's
parents, who continues his loyal service to their son after their deaths. He
is Bruce Wayne's closest confidant. Nolan felt Caine would effectively portray
the foster father element of the character.[7] Although Alfred's family is
depicted in the film as having served the Wayne family for generations, Caine
created his own backstory, in that before becoming Wayne's butler, Alfred
served in the Special Air Service. After being wounded, he was invited to the
position of the Wayne family butler by Thomas Wayne because, "He wanted a
butler, but someone a bit tougher than that, you know?"[10]

Liam Neeson as Henri Ducard: In reality the true Ra's al Ghul in disguise,
Ducard trains Bruce in ninjutsu, a form of martial arts. Writer David Goyer
said he felt Ra's was the most complex of all the Batman villains, comparing
him to Osama bin Laden as, "He's not crazy in the way that all the other
Batman villains are. He's not bent on revenge; he's actually trying to heal
the world. He's just doing it by very draconian means."[11] Neeson is commonly
cast as a mentor, so the revelation that his character was the main villain
was intended to shock viewers.[7]

Katie Holmes as Rachel Dawes: Bruce's childhood friend who serves as Gotham
City's assistant district attorney, fighting against the corruption in the
city. Nolan found a "tremendous warmth and great emotional appeal" in Holmes,
and also felt "she has a maturity beyond her years that comes across in the
film and is essential to the idea that Rachel is something of a moral
conscience for Bruce".[12]

Gary Oldman as Sgt. James Gordon: One of the few uncorrupted Gotham City
police officers. He was the officer on duty the night of the murder of Bruce
Wayne's parents. In this way, he shares a special bond with the adult Bruce
and thus with Batman. Nolan originally wanted to cast Oldman as a villain,[13]
but when Chris Cooper turned down the role of Gordon to spend time with his
family he decided that it would be refreshing for Oldman to play the role
instead.[14] "I embody the themes of the movie which are the values of family,
courage and compassion and a sense of right and wrong, good and bad and
justice," Oldman said of his character. Oldman filmed most of his scenes in
Britain.[15] Goyer said Oldman heavily resembled Gordon as drawn by David
Mazzucchelli in Batman: Year One.[7]

Cillian Murphy as Dr. Jonathan Crane / The Scarecrow: A psychopharmacologist
who works at Arkham Asylum and has developed fear-inducing toxins. He takes on
the persona of the Scarecrow to use during his experiments, in which he uses
his patients as human guinea pigs for his toxins. Nolan decided against Murphy
for Batman, before casting him as Scarecrow.[16] Murphy read numerous comics
featuring the Scarecrow, and discussed making the character look less
theatrical with Nolan. Murphy explained, "I wanted to avoid the Worzel
Gummidge look, because he's not a very physically imposing man - he's more
interested in the manipulation of the mind and what that can do."[17]

Morgan Freeman as Lucius Fox: A high-ranking Wayne Enterprises employee who
was demoted to working in the company's Applied Science Division, where he
conducts advanced studies in biochemistry and mechanical engineering. Fox
supplies Bruce with much of the gear necessary to carry out Batman's mission
and is promoted to CEO when Bruce repossesses the company by the end of the
film. Freeman was Goyer's first and only choice for the role.[7]

Other cast members include Tom Wilkinson as crime boss Carmine Falcone, ruler
of the Gotham underworld; Rutger Hauer as Bill Earle, the CEO of Wayne
Enterprises who takes the company public in the long-term absence of Bruce
Wayne; Ken Watanabe as Ra's al Ghul's decoy; Mark Boone Junior as Gordon's
corrupt partner Detective Arnold Flass; Colin McFarlane as Police commissioner
Gillian B. Loeb; Linus Roache and Sara Stewart as Thomas and Martha Wayne,
Bruce's parents; Richard Brake as Joe Chill, the Waynes' killer; Khan Bonfils
as a member of the League of Shadows Warriors; and Rade Å erbedÅ¾ija as a
homeless man, who is the last person to meet Bruce when he leaves Gotham, and
the first civilian to see Batman.

## [edit] Production

### [edit] Development

Further information: Batman (film series)#Batman V

In January 2003, Warner Bros. hired Memento director Christopher Nolan to
direct an untitled Batman film,[18] and David S. Goyer signed on to write the
script two months later.[19] Nolan stated his intention to reinvent the film
franchise of Batman by "doing the origins story of the character, which is a
story that's never been told before". Nolan said that humanity and realism
would be the basis of the origin film, and that "the world of Batman is that
of grounded reality. [It] will be a recognizable, contemporary reality against
which an extraordinary heroic figure arises." Goyer said that the goal of the
film was to get the audience to care for both Batman and Bruce Wayne.[20]
Nolan felt the previous films were exercises in style rather than drama, and
described his inspiration as being Richard Donner's 1978 Superman, in its
focus on depicting the character's growth.[3] Also similar to Superman, Nolan
wanted an all-star supporting cast for Batman Begins to lend a more epic feel
and credibility to the story.[7]

Nolan's personal "jumping off point" of inspiration was Batman: The Man Who
Falls, a short story about Bruce's travels throughout the world. The early
scene in Batman Begins of young Bruce Wayne falling into a well was adapted
from The Man Who Falls.[21] Batman: The Long Halloween, written by Jeph Loeb
and drawn by Tim Sale, influenced Goyer in writing the screenplay, with the
villain Carmine Falcone as one of many elements which were drawn from
Halloween's "sober, serious approach".[21] The writers considered having
Harvey Dent in the film, but replaced him with the new character Rachel Dawes
when they realized, "we couldnât do him justice".[22] The character was
later portrayed by Aaron Eckhart in the 2008 sequel The Dark Knight. The
sequel to Halloween, Batman: Dark Victory, also served as an influence.[23]
Goyer used the vacancy of Bruce Wayne's multi-year absence presented in
Batman: Year One to help set up some of the film's events in the transpiring
years.[24] In addition, the film's Sergeant James Gordon was based on his
comic book incarnation as seen in Year One. The writers of Batman Begins also
used Frank Miller's Year One plot device, which was about a corrupt police
force that led to Gordon and Gotham City's need for Batman.[21]

A common idea in the comics is that Bruce saw a Zorro film with his parents
before they were murdered. Nolan explained that by ignoring that idea â
which he stated is not found in Batman's first appearances â it emphasized
the importance of bats to Bruce and that becoming a superhero is a wholly
original idea on his part. It is for this reason Nolan believes other DC
characters do not exist in the universe of his film, otherwise Wayne's reasons
for taking up costumed vigilantism would have been very different.[25]

### [edit] Filming

As with all his films, Nolan refused a second unit to keep his vision
consistent.[26] Filming began in March 2004 in the Vatnajokull glacier in
Iceland (standing in for Bhutan).[26] The crew built a village and the front
doors to Ra's temple,[27] as well as a road to access the remote area.[26] The
weather was problematic, with 75 miles per hour (121 km/h) winds,[26] rain,
and a lack of snow. A shot Wally Pfister had planned with a crane had to be
done with a handheld camera.[27]

In seeking inspiration from Superman and other blockbuster films of the late
1970s and early 1980s, Nolan based most of the production in England,
specifically Shepperton Studios.[28] A Batcave set was built there and
measured 250 feet (76 m) long, 120 feet (37 m) wide, and 40 feet (12 m) high.
Production designer Nathan Crowley installed twelve pumps to create a
waterfall with 12,000 imperial gallons (55,000 l; 14,000 US gal), and built
rocks using molds of real caves.[29] In January 2004, an airship hangar at
Cardington, Bedfordshire was rented by Warner Bros. for filming in April
2004.[30] There, the Narrows and the feet of the monorails filled the 900 feet
(270 m) long stage.[29]

Mentmore Towers was chosen from twenty different locations for Wayne Manor, as
Nolan and Crowley liked its white floors, which gave the impression of the
manor as a memorial to Wayne's parents.[31] The building chosen to represent
Arkham Asylum was the National Institute for Medical Research building in Mill
Hill, north west London, England.[32] The St. Pancras railway station and the
Abbey Mills Pumping Stations were used for Arkham's interiors.[29] The
University College London was used for courtrooms.[29] Some scenes, including
the Batmobile pursuit,[26] were filmed in Chicago at locations such as Lower
Wacker Drive and 35 East Wacker.[33] Authorities agreed to raise Franklin
Street Bridge for a scene where access to the Narrows is closed.[26]

Despite the film's darkness, Nolan wanted to make the film appeal to a wide
age range. "Not the youngest kids obviously, I think what weâve done is
probably a bit intense for them but I certainly didnât want to exclude the
sort of ten to 12-year olds, because as a kid I would have loved to have seen
a movie like this." Because of this, nothing gory or bloody was filmed.[34]

### [edit] Design

Nolan used the cult science fiction film Blade Runner as a source of
inspiration for Batman Begins. He screened Blade Runner to cinematographer
Wally Pfister and two others to show the attitude and style that he wanted to
draw from the film. Nolan described the film's world as "an interesting lesson
on the technique of exploring and describing a credible universe that doesn't
appear to have any boundaries", a lesson that he applied to the production of
Batman Begins.[35]

Nolan worked with production designer Nathan Crowley to create the look of
Gotham City. Crowley built a model of the city that filled Nolan's garage.[31]
Crowley and Nolan designed it as a large, modern metropolitan area that would
reflect the various periods of architecture that the city had gone through.
Elements were drawn from New York City, Chicago, and Tokyo; the latter for its
elevated freeways and monorails. The Narrows was based on the slummish nature
of the (now demolished) walled city of Kowloon in Hong Kong.[36]

#### [edit] Batmobile

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Tumbler, the Batmobile used in Batman Begins

Crowley started the process of designing the Tumbler for the film by model
bashing. Crowley used the nose cone of a P-38 Lightning model to serve as the
chassis for the Tumbler's jet engine. Six models of the Tumbler were built to
1:12 scale in the course of four months. Following the scale model creation, a
crew of over 30 people, including Crowley and engineers Chris Culvert and
Annie Smith, carved a full-size replica of the Tumbler out of a large block of
Styrofoam in two months.[37]

The Styrofoam model was used to create a steel "test frame", which had to
stand up to several standards: have a speed of over 100 miles per hour (160
km/h), go from 0 to 60 miles per hour (97 km/h) in 5 seconds, possess a
steering system to make sharp turns at city corners, and withstand a self-
propelled launch of up to 30 feet (9.1 m). On the first jump test, the
Tumbler's front end collapsed and had to be completely rebuilt. The basic
configuration of the newly designed Tumbler included a 5.7-liter Chevy V8
engine, a truck axle for the rear axle, front tires by Hoosier (which are
actually dirt racing tires used on the right rear of open wheel sprint cars),
rear 4x4 mud tires by Interco., and the suspension system of Baja racing
trucks. The design and development process took nine months and cost several
million dollars.[37]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The rear of the Tumbler, showing the flaps and engine

With the design process complete, four street-ready race cars were
constructed, with each vehicle possessing 65 carbon fiber panels and costing
$250,000 to build. Two of the four cars were specialized versions. One version
was the flap version, which had hydraulics and flaps to detail the close-up
shots where the vehicle propelled itself through the air. The other version
was the jet version, in which an actual jet engine was mounted onto the
vehicle, fueled by six propane tanks. Due to the poor visibility inside the
vehicle by the driver, monitors were connected to cameras on the vehicle body.
The professional drivers for the Tumblers practiced driving the vehicles for
six months before they drove on the streets of Chicago for the film's
scenes.[37]

The interior of the Tumbler was an immobile studio set and not actually the
interior of a street-capable Tumbler. The cockpit was over-sized to fit
cameras for scenes filmed in the Tumbler interior. In addition, another
version of the Tumbler was a miniature model that was 1:5 scale of the actual
Tumbler. This miniature model had an electric motor and was used to show the
Tumbler flying across ravines and between buildings. However, the actual
Tumbler was used for the waterfall sequence.[37]

#### [edit] Batsuit

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Batsuit of Batman Begins, worn by Christian Bale

The filmmakers intended to create a very mobile Batsuit that would allow the
wearer to move easily to fight and crouch. Previous film incarnations of the
Batsuit had been stiff and especially restricted full head movement. Costume
designer Lindy Hemming and her crew worked on the Batsuit at an FX workshop
codenamed "Cape Town", a secured compound located at Shepperton Studios in
London. The Batsuit's basic design was a neoprene undersuit, which was shaped
by attaching molded cream latex sections. Christian Bale was molded and
sculpted prior to his physical training so the team could work on a full body
cast. To avoid imperfections picked up by sculpting with clay, plastiline was
used to smooth the surface. In addition, the team brewed different mixtures of
foam to find the mixture that would be the most flexible, light, durable, and
black. The latter presented a problem, since the process to make the foam
black reduced the foam's durability.[5]

For the cape, director Christopher Nolan wanted to have a "flowing cloak...
that blows and flows as in so many great graphic novels". Hemming's team
created the cape out of their own version of parachute nylon that had
electrostatic flocking, a process shared with the team by the British Ministry
of Defence. The process was used by the London police force to minimize night
vision detection. The cape was topped by a cowl, which was designed by Nolan,
Hemming, and costume effects supervisor Graham Churchyard. The cowl was
created to be thin enough to allow motion but thick enough to avoid wrinkling
when Bale turned his head in the Batsuit. Churchyard explained the cowl had
been designed to show "a man who has angst", so his character would be
revealed through the mask.[5]

### [edit] Special effects

For Batman Begins, Nolan preferred using traditional stuntwork over computer
generated imagery.[3] Scale models were used to represent the Narrows and Ra's
al Ghul's temple.[27][31] There were, however, several establishing shots that
were CG composite images; that is, an image composed of multiple images.
Examples include Gotham's skyline, exterior shots of Wayne Tower, and some of
the exterior monorail shots.[31] The climactic monorail sequence mixed live
action footage, model work, and CGI.[38]

The bats were entirely digital, as it was decided directing real bats on set
would be problematic. Dead bats were scanned to create digital models.
Locations and sets were recreated on the computer so the flying bats would not
be superfluous once incorporated into the finished film.[31]

### [edit] Soundtrack

See also: Batman Begins soundtrack

The score for Batman Begins was composed by Hans Zimmer and James Newton
Howard. Nolan originally invited Zimmer to compose the music, and Zimmer asked
Nolan if he could invite Howard to compose as well, as they had always planned
a collaboration.[39] The two composers collaborated on separate themes for the
"split personality" of Bruce Wayne and his alter ego, Batman. Zimmer and
Howard began composing in Los Angeles and moved to London where they stayed
for twelve weeks to complete most of their writing.[40] Zimmer and Howard
sought inspiration for shaping the score by visiting the Batman Begins
sets.[41]

Zimmer wanted to avoid writing music that had been done in earlier Batman
films, so the score became an amalgamation of orchestra and electronic music.
The film's ninety-piece orchestra[39] was developed from members of various
London orchestras, and Zimmer chose to use more than the normal number of
cellos. Zimmer enlisted a boy soprano to help reflect the music in some of
film's scenes where Bruce Wayne's parents tragic memories are involved. "He's
singing a fairly pretty tune and then he gets stuck, it's like froze, arrested
development," said Zimmer. He also attempted to add human dimension to Batman,
whose behavior would typically be seen as "psychotic", through the music. Both
composers collaborated to create 2 hours and 20 minutes worth of music for the
film.[41] Zimmer composed the action sequences, while Howard focused on the
film's drama.[39]

## [edit] Themes

Comic book writer and author Danny Fingeroth argues that a strong theme in the
film is Bruce's search for a father figure, saying "[Alfred] is the good
father that Bruce comes to depend on. Bruceâs real father died before they
could establish an adult relationship, and Liam Neesonâs Ducard is stern and
demanding, didactic and challenging, but not a father figure with any
sympathy. If Bruce is anyoneâs son, it is Alfredâs. [Morgan] Freemanâs
Lucius is cool and imperturbable, another steady anchor in Bruceâs
life."[42] English professor Mark Fisher of the University of Florida states
that Bruce's search for justice requires him to learn from a proper father
figure, with Thomas Wayne and Ra's al Ghul being the two counterpoints. Alfred
provides a maternal figure of unconditional love, despite the overall lack of
focus on a mother figure in Bruce's life.[43]

Fingeroth also argues that a major theme in the film is fear, which supports
the story of Bruce Wayne becoming a hero. Director Christopher Nolan stated
that the idea behind the film was "a person who would confront his innermost
fear and then attempt to become it". Fingeroth referred to this film's
depiction as "the man with fear â but who rises above it". The theme of fear
is further personified by the choice of antagonist, the Scarecrow.[42] The
film depicts how fear can affect all creatures regardless of might. Allusions
to fear are seen throughout, from Bruce's conquering of his demons, to
becoming Batman, to the Scarecrow and his deadly fear toxin. The macabre,
distorted images presented in the Scarecrow's toxin-induced hallucinations
also express the idea of terror to an extreme.[44]

Critic Brian Orndorf considered Batman Begins "fierce" and "demonstrative in
brood", giving the film an abundance of gravitas and energy. It strays away
from the lighter fare of Joel Schumacher's 1997 Batman film, Batman & Robin,
which contained camp one-liners throughout. The theme of fear is intensified
with the help of the musical score by Zimmer and Howard, which also "eschews
traditional heroic themes".[44] Also contrary to previous Batman films, a
psychological investigation of Bruce Wayne's split personality in the bat suit
is only lightly touched upon. Orndorf noted that Bruce is a "character
constantly striving to do the right thing, not worn down by incessant
reexamination".[44]

## [edit] Reception

### [edit] Reviews

Based on 250 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes, Batman Begins currently
garners an 84% "fresh" rating.[45] The film's reception was more ambivalent
within the 40 reviews in Rotten Tomatoes' "Cream of the Crop" subset, reaching
a 62% positive consensus.[46] By comparison, Metacritic calculated an average
score of 70 from the 41 reviews it collected.[47]

James Berardinelli applauded Nolan and Goyer's work creating more
understanding into "who [Batman] is and what motivates him", something
Berardinelli felt Tim Burton's film lacked; at the same time, Berardinelli
felt the romantic aspect between Bale and Holmes did not work because the
actors lacked the chemistry Christopher Reeve and Margot Kidder (Superman), or
Tobey Maguire and Kirsten Dunst (Spider-Man) shared in their respective
roles.[48] According to Total Film, Nolan manages to create such strong
characters and story that the third-act action sequences cannot compare to "
the frisson of two people talking", and Katie Holmes and Christian Bale's
romantic subplot has a spark "refreshingly free of Peter Parker/Mary Jane-
style whining".[49]

Los Angeles Times' Kenneth Turan, who felt the film began slowly, stated that
the "story, psychology and reality, not special effects", assisted the
darkness behind Batman's arsenal; he noted that Neeson and Holmes, unlike
Bale's ability to "feel his role in his bones", do not appear to fit their
respective characters in "being both comic-book archetypes and real
people".[50] The New Yorker's David Denby did not share Berardinelli and
Turan's opinion. He was unimpressed with the film, when comparing it to the
two Tim Burton films, and that Christian Bale's presence was hindered by the
"dull earnestness of the screenplay", the final climax was "cheesy and
unexciting", and that Nolan had resorting to imitating the "fakery" used by
other filmmakers when filming action sequences.[51]

Michael Wilmington of the Chicago Tribune believed Nolan and Miller managed to
"comfortably mix the tormented drama and revenge motifs with light hearted
gags and comic book allusions", and that Nolan takes the series out of the
"slam-bang Hollywood jokefests" the franchise had drifted into.[52] Comic book
scribe and editor Dennis O'Neil stated that he "felt the filmmakers really
understood the character they were translating", citing this film as the best
of the live-action Batman films.[53] In contrast, J.R. Jones, from the Chicago
Reader, criticized the script, and Nolan and David Goyer for not living up to
the "hype about exploring Batman's damaged psyche".[54] Roger Ebert, who gave
mixed reviews to the previous films, wrote this was "the Batman movie I've
been waiting for; more correctly, this is the movie I did not realize I was
waiting for". Giving it four out of four stars, he commended the realistic
portrayals of the Batman arsenalâthe Batsuit, Batcave, Batmobile, and the
Batsignalâas well as the focus on "the story and character" with less stress
on "high-tech action".[55]

Like Berardinelli, USA Today's Mike Clark thought Bale performed the role of
Batman as well as he did Patrick Bateman in American Psycho, but that the
relationship between Bruce Wayne and Rachel Dawes was "frustratingly
underdeveloped".[56] Kyle Smith thought Bale exhibited "both the menace and
the wit he showed in his brilliant turn in American Psycho", and that the film
works so well because of the realism, stating, "Batman starts stripping away
each layer of Gotham crime only to discover a sicker and more monstrous evil
beneath, his rancid city simultaneously invokes early â90s New York, when
criminals frolicked to the tune of five murders a day; Serpico New York, when
cops were for sale; and today, when psychos seek to kill us all at once rather
than one by one."[57] In contrast, Salon.com's Stephanie Zacharek felt Nolan
did not deliver the emotional depth expected of "one of the most soulful and
tortured superheroes of all"; she thought Bale, unlike Michael Keaton who she
compared him to, failed to connect with the audience underneath the mask, but
that Gary Oldman succeeds in "emotional complexity" where the rest of the
movie fails.[58] However, Tim Burton felt Nolan "captured the real spirit that
these kind of movies are supposed to have nowadays. When I did Batman twenty
years ago, in 1988 or something, it was a different time in comic book movies.
You couldn't go into that dark side of comics yet. The last couple of years
that has become acceptable and Nolan certainly got more to the root of what
the Batman comics are about."[59]

### [edit] Box office

Batman Begins opened on June 15, 2005 in the United States and Canada in 3,858
theaters,[60] including 55 IMAX theaters.[61] The film ranked at the top in
its opening weekend, accumulating $48,745,440,[60] which was seen as "strong
but unimpressive by today's instantaneous blockbuster standards". The film's
five-day gross was $72.9 million, beating Batman Forever (1995) as the
franchise high. Batman Begins also broke the five-day opening record in the 55
IMAX theaters, grossing $3.16 million. Polled moviegoers rated the film with
an A, and according to the studio's surveys, Batman Begins was considered the
best of all the Batman films. The audience's demographic was 57 percent male
and 54 percent people over the age of 25.[61]

The film held its top spot for another weekend, accumulating $27,589,389 in a
43 percent drop from its first weekend.[62] Batman Begins went on to gross
$372,353,017 worldwide.[60] It is the third-highest grossing Batman film to
date, behind Tim Burton's Batman, which grossed $411,348,924 worldwide and The
Dark Knight which has grossed over $1 billion. In comparison to the previous
Batman films, Batman Begins averaged $12,634 per theater, the least of all the
Batman films. It was released in more theaters, but sold fewer tickets than
any of the others, with the exception of Batman & Robin.[63] Batman Begins was
the eighth-highest grossing film of 2005 in the US.[64]

### [edit] Home media

The DVD of Batman Begins was released on October 18, 2005 in both single disc
and two-disc deluxe editions.[65] In addition to the film, the deluxe edition
contained featurettes and other bonus materials. The edition contained a small
paperback booklet, the first Batman story Detective Comics #27, as well as
Batman: The Man Who Falls and an excerpt from Batman: The Long Halloween.[66]
Batman Begins achieved first place in national sales and rental charts in
October 2005, becoming the top-selling DVD in the fourth quarter of 2005. The
DVD grossed $11.36 million in rental revenue.[67] The DVD held its position at
the top of the sales chart for a second week, but fell to second place behind
Bewitched on video rental charts.[68]

Batman Begins was released on HD DVD on October 10, 2006.[69] A Limited
Edition Giftset of the film was released on DVD and Blu-ray on July 8, 2008,
to coincide with The Dark Knight which hit theaters July 18, 2008.[70] Due to
the successful box office performance of The Dark Knight, the Batman Begins
DVD has seen an increase in both sales and rentals.[71] The film grossed
$125,000,000 in DVD sales, bringing its total film gross to $496,853,783.[72]

### [edit] Awards

Wally Pfister was nominated for Best Cinematography at the 78th Academy
Awards, receiving the film's only Oscar nomination. The film received three
nominations at the 59th BAFTA Awards. Just months after its release, Batman
Begins was voted by Empire readers as the 36th greatest film of all time.[73]
In 2006, the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers honored
James Newton Howard, Hans Zimmer, and Ramin Djawadi with an ASCAP award for
composing a film that became one of the top grossing films of 2005.[74] The
film was awarded three Saturn Awards in 2006 as well: Best Fantasy Film, Best
Actor for Christian Bale, and Best Writing for Nolan and Goyer.[75] Christian
Bale would go on to win an MTV Movie Award for Best Hero.[76] However, Katie
Holmes's performance was not well received, and she was nominated for a Razzie
Award for Worst Supporting Actress.[77] Batman Begins won the fan-based Total
Film award for Best Film.[78]

## [edit] Impact

Shawn Adler of MTV stated after Batman Begins, a trend of darker genre films,
that either retold back-stories or rebooted them altogether, began. Examples
he cited were Casino Royale, as well as the in-development RoboCop, Red Sonja
and He-Man.[79] Filmmakers, screenwriters and producers who have mentioned the
film to describe their projects include; Jon Favreau and Iron Man;[80] Edward
Norton and The Incredible Hulk;[81] McG and Terminator Salvation (which also
stars Bale);[82] Damon Lindelof and Star Trek;[83] Lorenzo di Bonaventura and
G.I. Joe: The Rise of Cobra;[84] and even Hugh Jackman and X-Men Origins:
Wolverine.[85]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ http://www.leesmovieinfo.net/Video-Sales.php?type=3
  2. ^ a b Dunkley, Cathy; Bing, Jonathan (2003-09-07). "Inside Move: New dynamic for WB duo". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117891989.html?categoryid=1019&cs=1. Retrieved on 2006-11-02.
  3. ^ a b c Smith, Adam (July 2005). "The Original American Psycho". Empire: pp. 74â80, 82, 84, 87.
  4. ^ Pearlman, Cindy (2004-11-19). "A crash but no tickets for Bale's Batmobile in Chicago". Chicago Sun-Times.
  5. ^ a b c d "Batman Begins Production Notes - The Batsuit & Gadgetry". Warner Brothers. http://www2.warnerbros.com/batmanbegins/productionnotes/#. Retrieved on 2006-11-06.
  6. ^ Warner Bros. (2003-09-11). "Official: Christian Bale is Batman!". Superhero Hype!. http://www.superherohype.com/news/batmannews.php?id=113. Retrieved on 2006-11-02.
  7. ^ a b c d e f g The Journey Begins: Creative Concepts [DVD, 2005]
  8. ^ Hutchins, John (2005). "Christian Bale". UGO Networks. http://batman.ugo.com/movies/batman_begins/bale.asp. Retrieved on 2007-08-29.
  9. ^ LaSalle, Mick (2005-06-14). "The caped crusader has come back. He's brawnier, but he still has brains.". San Francisco Chronicle. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/chronicle/reviews/movies/BATMANBEGINS.DTL&type=movies. Retrieved on 2008-07-13.
  10. ^ "Alfred the Butler". Empire: p. 79\. July 2005.
  11. ^ Ryan, Tom (2005-07-14). "In defence of big, expensive films". The Age. http://www.theage.com.au/news/film/defending-the-blockbuster/2005/07/14/1120934352863.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-26.
  12. ^ "'Batman Begins' press conference, part two". Time Out â New York. 2005-06-16. http://www.timeout.com/film/newyork/news/488/batman-begins-press-conference-part-two.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-13.
  13. ^ Thompson, Anne (2008-07-06). "Dark Knight Review: Nolan Talks Sequel Inflation". Variety. http://weblogs.variety.com/thompsononhollywood/2008/07/dark-knight-rev.html#more. Retrieved on 2008-07-07.
  14. ^ Adler, Shawn (2008-03-04). "Chris Cooper On His âBatman Beginsâ Near Miss". MTV. http://moviesblog.mtv.com/2008/03/04/chris-cooper-on-his-batman-begins-near-miss/. Retrieved on 2008-03-04.
  15. ^ "More Mr Nice Guy". Daily Telegraph. 2007-06-23. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/arts/main.jhtml;jsessionid=DSLWKGIFDVJIHQFIQMGSFF4AVCBQWIV0?xml=/arts/2007/06/23/smoldman23.xml&page=1. Retrieved on 2007-06-25.
  16. ^ Fleming, Michael; Dunkley, Cathy (2003-12-10). "'Batman' bags a baddie". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117896986.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2006-11-02.
  17. ^ Smith, Adam (July 2005). "The Scarecrow". Empire: p. 77.
  18. ^ Fleming, Michael (2003-01-27). "'Batman' captures director Nolan". Variety. http://www.variety.com/index.asp?layout=story&articleid=VR1117879566&categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2006-11-02.
  19. ^ Brodesser, Claude; Dunkley, Cathy (2003-03-26). "Inside Move: WB jump starts Batmobile". Variety. http://www.variety.com/index.asp?layout=story&articleid=VR1117883691&categoryid=13&query=%2A&cs=1. Retrieved on 2006-11-02.
  20. ^ Graser, Marc; Dunkley, Cathy (2004-02-08). "The bat and the beautiful". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117899714.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2006-11-02.
  21. ^ a b c DiDio, Dan (Vice President of DC Comics), Goyer, David S. (Co-writer), Levitz, Paul (President - DC Comics), Nolan, Christopher (Director), Schreck, Bob (Batman Editor - DC Comics). (2006). Genesis of the Bat [DVD featurette].
  22. ^ Nolan, Christopher; Goyer, David S. (2007). Absolute Batman: The Long Halloween. p. Â§Introduction. ISBN 1401212824.
  23. ^ Vineyard, Jennifer (2004-12-17). "'Batman Begins' Scribe: 'We're Telling A Story That Has Never Been Told'". VH1. http://www.vh1.com/movies/news/articles/1494981/12172004/story.jhtml. Retrieved on 2006-12-13.
  24. ^ Stax (2004-09-24). "The Influences of Batman Begins". IGN. http://comics.ign.com/articles/593/593571p1.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-13.
  25. ^ Geoff Boucher (2008-10-29). "Christopher Nolan says his Batman doesn't play well with others". Los Angeles Times. http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/herocomplex/2008/10/christopher-n-2.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-30.
  26. ^ a b c d e f "Batman Begins Production Notes - About the Production". Warner Bros.. http://www2.warnerbros.com/batmanbegins/productionnotes/#. Retrieved on 2007-02-24.
  27. ^ a b c Journey to Discovery [DVD, 2005]
  28. ^ "`Batman Begins' goes to the source". The Kansas City Star. June 25, 2004.
  29. ^ a b c d Kalindjian, Claudia (2005). Batman Begins: The Official Movie Guide. Time Warner International. pp. 144â45. ISBN 1-932273-44-1.
  30. ^ "Airship hangar is home to Batman". BBC News Online. 2004-02-20. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/england/beds/bucks/herts/3506175.stm. Retrieved on 2006-11-02.
  31. ^ a b c d e Gotham City Rises [DVD, 2005]
  32. ^ Kasriel, Alex (2005-06-16). "From leafy suburbs to silver screen". Edgware & Mill Hill Times. http://www.edgwaretimes.co.uk/display.var.606532.0.0.php?utag=8269. Retrieved on 2007-05-05.
  33. ^ "35 East Wacker Drive". Emporis. 2007. http://www.emporis.com/en/wm/bu/?id=35eastwackerdrive-chicago-il-usa. Retrieved on 2007-05-14.
  34. ^ "'Batman Begins' press conference, part two". Time Out London. 2005-06-16. http://www.timeout.com/film/news/488/. Retrieved on 2008-07-13.
  35. ^ Jankiewicz, Pat (August 2005). "Dark Knight Resurrected". Starlog.
  36. ^ Otto, Jeff (2006-06-05). "Interview: Christopher Nolan". IGN. http://movies.ign.com/articles/622/622719p1.html. Retrieved on 2006-11-06.
  37. ^ a b c d Brain, Marshall. "How the Batmobile Works". HowStuffWorks. http://auto.howstuffworks.com/batmobile.htm/printable. Retrieved on 2006-11-05.
  38. ^ Saving Gotham City [DVD, 2005]
  39. ^ a b c Graydon, Danny (July 2005). "A Little Knight Music". Empire. p. 87.
  40. ^ D., Spence (2005-06-10). "Batman Vs. Hans Zimmer & James Newton Howard Part 1". IGN. http://music.ign.com/articles/624/624382p1.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-01.
  41. ^ a b D., Spence (2005-06-13). "Batman Vs. Hans Zimmer and James Newton Howard Part 2". IGN. http://music.ign.com/articles/624/624641p1.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-01.
  42. ^ a b Fingeroth, Danny (2005-06-15). "Batman Begins: Redefining the Dark Knight". VFXWorld. http://vfxworld.com/?atype=articles&id=2523&page=1. Retrieved on 2007-10-13.
  43. ^ Fisher, Mark (2006). "Gothic Oedipus: subjectivity and Capitalism in Christopher Nolan's Batman Begins". English Department, University of Florida. http://www.english.ufl.edu/imagetext/archives/v2_2/fisher/#13. Retrieved on 2007-10-13.
  44. ^ a b c Orndorf, Brian (2005-06-14). "Thrilling 'Batman Begins' Rebuilds Franchise". OhmyNews. http://english.ohmynews.com/articleview/article_view.asp?menu=c10400&no=231718&rel_no=1. Retrieved on 2008-07-13.
  45. ^ "Batman Begins". Rotten Tomatoes. http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/batman_begins/. Retrieved on 2008-02-02.
  46. ^ "Batman Begins: Rotten Tomatoes' Cream of the Crop". Rotten Tomatoes. http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/batman_begins/?critic=creamcrop. Retrieved on 2007-09-09.
  47. ^ "Batman Begins (2005): Reviews". Metacritic. http://www.metacritic.com/film/titles/batmanbegins. Retrieved on 2007-09-09.
  48. ^ Berardinelli, James. "Reel View's review of Batman Begins". Reel Views. http://www.reelviews.net/movies/b/batman_begins.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-28.
  49. ^ "Batman Begins - Film Review". Total Film. http://www.totalfilm.com/cinema_reviews/batman_begins. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  50. ^ Turan, Kenneth (2005-06-14). "Los Angeles Times reviews Batman Begins". Los Angeles Times. http://www.calendarlive.com/movies/turan/cl-et-batman14jun14,0,4819786.story. Retrieved on 2007-09-04.
  51. ^ Denby, David (2005-06-05). "Aiming Low". The New Yorker. http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2005/06/13/050613crci_cinema. Retrieved on 2007-08-27.
  52. ^ Wilmington, Michael. "Movie review: 'Batman Begins'". Chicago Tribune. http://chicago.metromix.com/movies/review/movie-review-batman-begins/159537/content. Retrieved on 2007-09-13.
  53. ^ Bray, Greg (2006-10-18). "Interview: DENNY O'NEIL". Batman On Film. http://www.batman-on-film.com/interview_dennyoneil_gbray_2006.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-27.
  54. ^ Jones, J.R.. "Who's Afraid of the Big Bad City?". Chicago Reader. http://www.chicagoreader.com/movies/archives/2005/0605/050617.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-27.
  55. ^ Ebert, Roger (2005-06-13). "Ebert reviews Batman Begins". Chicago Sun-Times. http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20050613/REVIEWS/50525003/1023. Retrieved on 2007-08-27.
  56. ^ Clark, Mike (2005-06-13). "Batman role fits Bale, but 'Begins' wears thin". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/life/movies/reviews/2005-06-13-batman-begins_x.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-28.
  57. ^ Smith, Kyle (2007-03-10). "Kyle Smith review of Batman Begins". KyleSmithOnline. http://kylesmithonline.com/?p=349. Retrieved on 2007-09-09.
  58. ^ Zacharek, Stephanie (2005-06-15). "Salon reviews Batman Begins". Salon.com. http://dir.salon.com/story/ent/movies/review/2005/06/15/batman_begins/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-09.
  59. ^ Ramey, Bill (2008-04-13). "Tim Burton Talks Batman". Batman on Film. http://www.batman-on-film.com/burton-talks-batman-in-amsterdam_4-13-08.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-16.
  60. ^ a b c "Batman Begins (2005)". Box Office Mojo. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=batmanbegins.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-04.
  61. ^ a b Gray, Brandon (2005-06-20). "'Batman Begins' in the Shadows". Box Office Mojo. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=1837&p=.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-25.
  62. ^ Gray, Brandon (2005-06-27). "'Batman' Sweeps 'Bewitched,' Swats Bug". Box Office Mojo. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=1841&p=.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-25.
  63. ^ "Batman Movies". Box Office Mojo. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/franchises/chart/?id=batman.htm. Retrieved on 2006-12-01.
  64. ^ "2005 Yearly Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?yr=2005&p=.htm. Retrieved on 2006-12-01.
  65. ^ Chaney, Jen (2005-10-18). "'Batman': A Decent, If Not Heroic, DVD". The Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/10/17/AR2005101700863_pf.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-13.
  66. ^ "About the DVD". Warner Bros.. http://www2.warnerbros.com/batmanbegins/synopsis.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-13.
  67. ^ "Top renters: week ended October 30, 2005.". Video Business. November 7, 2005.
  68. ^ "'Begins' has 2nd a win under its utility belt". The Hollywood Reporter. November 3, 2005.
  69. ^ Ault, Susanne. "Batman flies to HD DVD.". Video Business. http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-151857341.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-04.
  70. ^ Monfette, Christopher (2008-07-08). "Batman Begins Limited Edition Giftset Blu-ray Review". IGN. http://dvd.ign.com/articles/887/887198p1.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-13.
  71. ^ Amanda Bartz (2008-07-24). "Batman Begins DVD Sells More and More". MarketWatch. http://www.marketwatch.com/news/story/dark-knight-record-breaking-box/story.aspx?guid=%7B027AB2A5-8B56-4C01-B8D7-666B686B08F6%7D&dist=hppr. Retrieved on 2008-08-21.
  72. ^ http://www.leesmovieinfo.net/Video-Sales.php?type=3
  73. ^ "The 201 Greatest Movies Of All Time". Empire: p. 95\. 2006-01-27.
  74. ^ "ASCAP award". American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers. http://www.ascap.com/eventsawards/awards/filmtv/2006/boxoffice.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-09.
  75. ^ "2006 Saturn Awards". Locus Mag. http://www.locusmag.com/SFAwards/Db/Saturn2006.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-09.
  76. ^ "2006 MTV Movie Awards". MTV. http://www.chiff.com/art/movies/MTV-movie-awards.htm#MTV_movie_winners. Retrieved on 2006-12-01.
  77. ^ "26th Annual Razzie Award Nominees for Worst Supporting Actress". Golden Raspberry Awards. http://www.razzies.com/history/05nomSActr.asp. Retrieved on 2006-12-01.
  78. ^ "Total Film readers' awards". Total Film. 2005-10-31. http://www.totalfilm.com/movie_news/total_film_readers_awards. Retrieved on 2006-11-19.
  79. ^ Shawn Adler (2008-08-14). "âHe-Manâ Movie Will Go Realistic: âWeâre Not Talking About Putting Nipples On The Trapjaw Suitâ". MTV Movies Blog. http://moviesblog.mtv.com/2008/08/14/he-man-movie-will-go-realistic-were-not-talking-about-putting-nipples-on-the-trapjaw-suit/. Retrieved on 2008-09-03.
  80. ^ Vespe, Eric (2007-07-28). "Quint goes one on one with Jon Favreau about IRON MAN at Comic-Con!!!". Ain't It Cool News. http://www.aintitcool.com/node/33483. Retrieved on 2007-07-29.
  81. ^ "Edward Norton". Total Film. 2008-03-07. http://www.totalfilm.com/features/world_exclusive_edward_norton_talks_incredible_hulk. Retrieved on 2008-03-19.
  82. ^ Joseph McGinty Nichol (2008-05-22). "Terminator Salvation Official Blog". http://rss.warnerbros.com/terminatorsalvation/2008/06/. Retrieved on 2008-06-04.
  83. ^ Clayton Neuman (2008-09-01). "Masters of SciFi - Star Trek and Lost Producer Damon Lindelof on Entertaining the Masses". AMC. http://blogs.amctv.com/scifi-scanner/2008/09/damon-lindelof-interview.php. Retrieved on 2008-09-03.
  84. ^ Robert Sanchez (2008-01-08). "IESB Exclusive Interview: A Chat with G.I. Joe Producer Lorenzo di Bonaventura!". IESB. http://www.iesb.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=4061&Itemid=99. Retrieved on 2008-02-23.
  85. ^ Larry Carroll (2008-04-29). "Hugh Jackman Looks Towards âBatman Beginsâ For âWolverineâ Inspiration, Talks Sequels". MTV Movies Blog. http://moviesblog.mtv.com/2008/04/29/hugh-jackman-looks-towards-batman-begins-for-wolverine-inspiration-talks-sequels/. Retrieved on 2008-09-03.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Batman
Begins  
  * Official website
  * Batman Begins at the Internet Movie Database
  * Batman Begins at Rotten Tomatoes
  * Batman Begins at Box Office Mojo
  * Batman Begins hype at Superhero Hype!
  * Batman Begins at the Open Directory Project
  * Official production notes
  * Scene-by-scene annotations of Batman Begins
  * Comic Vs. Film analysis at IGN
  * Film analysis at IGN

Preceded by  
Mr. & Mrs. Smith Box office number-one films of 2005 (USA)  
June 19 - June 26 Succeeded by  
War of the Worlds  
Box office number-one films of 2005 (UK)  
June 19 - June 26  
v â¢ d â¢ e

DC Comics films  
The Serials

Batman (1943) â¢ The Vigilante (1947) â¢ Superman (1948) â¢ Congo Bill
(1948) â¢ Batman and Robin (1949) â¢ Atom Man vs. Superman (1950)  
Single films

Superman and the Mole Men (1951) â¢ Batman (1966) â¢ Steel (1997) â¢ Road
to Perdition (2002) â¢ Catwoman (2004) â¢ A History of Violence (2005) â¢
Constantine (2005) â¢ V for Vendetta (2006) â¢ The Spirit (2008) â¢
Watchmen (2009)  
Franchises

Batman (1989â1997): Batman (1989) â¢ Batman Returns (1992) â¢ Batman
Forever (1995) â¢ Batman & Robin (1997)  
Batman (2005 â ): Batman Begins (2005) â¢ The Dark Knight (2008)

Superman: Superman (1978) â¢ Superman II (1980) â¢ Superman III (1983) â¢
Supergirl (1984) â¢ Superman IV: The Quest for Peace (1987) â¢ Superman
Returns (2006) â¢ Superman II: The Richard Donner Cut (2006)

Swamp Thing: Swamp Thing (1982) â¢ The Return of Swamp Thing (1989)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Films directed by Christopher Nolan  
Following (1998) â¢ Memento (2000) â¢ Insomnia (2002) â¢ Batman Begins
(2005) â¢ The Prestige (2006) â¢ The Dark Knight (2008) â¢ Inception (2010)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Batman franchise media  
Live-action television

Batman (1966â68) Â· Legends of the Superheroes Â· OnStar commercials Â·
Birds of Prey Â· Return to the Batcave  
Live-action serials and Feature Films

Batman (1943) Â· Batman and Robin (1949) Â· Batman (1966) Â· Batman (1989) Â·
Batman Returns (1992) Â· Batman Forever (1995) Â· Batman & Robin (1997) Â·
Batman Begins (2005) Â· The Dark Knight (2008)  
Animated television

Batman/Superman Hour (1968â1969) Â· New Adventures of Batman (1977â81) Â·
Batman: The Animated Series (1992â95) / New Batman Adventures (1997â99) Â·
Batman Beyond (1999â2001) Â· The Batman (2004â08) Â· The Brave and the
Bold (2008âpresent)  
Animated feature films

Mask of the Phantasm (1993) Â· SubZero (1998) Â· Return of the Joker (2000) Â·
Mystery of the Batwoman (2003) Â· The Batman vs. Dracula (2005) Â· Gotham
Knight (2008)  
Related animated TV series

Super Friends (1973â86) Â· Justice League (2001â04) Â· Justice League
Unlimited (2004â06)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Batman_Begins"

Categories: English-language films | 2005 films | American films | 2000s
action films | 2000s crime films | Warner Bros. Batman films | Films directed
by Christopher Nolan | Films shot anamorphically | Legendary Pictures films |
Neo-noir | Films shot in Chicago, Illinois | Films shot in Iceland | Films set
in Bhutan | Films based on comics by Frank Miller

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 20:01.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



