
# Open source

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For software under a license that meets the Open Source Definition, see Open
source software.

Not to be confused with Open Source Intelligence.

Open source is an approach to design, development, and distribution offering
practical accessibility to a product's source (goods and knowledge). Some
consider open source as one of various possible design approaches, while
others consider it a critical strategic element of their operations. Before
open source became widely adopted, developers and producers used a variety of
phrases to describe the concept; the term open source gained popularity with
the rise of the Internet, which provided access to diverse production models,
communication paths, and interactive communities.

The open source model of operation and decision making allows concurrent input
of different agendas, approaches and priorities, and differs from the more
closed, centralized models of development.[1] The principles and practices are
commonly applied to the peer production development of source code for
software that is made available for public collaboration. The result of this
peer-based collaboration is usually released as open-source software, however
open source methods are increasingly being applied in other fields of
endeavor, such as Biotechnology.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Definitions
    * 2.1 The Open Source Definition
    * 2.2 Perens' principles
  * 3 Proliferation of the term
  * 4 Non-software use
    * 4.1 Business models
  * 5 Widely-used open source products
  * 6 Society and culture
    * 6.1 Government
    * 6.2 Ethics
    * 6.3 Media
    * 6.4 Education
    * 6.5 Innovation communities
    * 6.6 Arts and recreation
  * 7 Certification
  * 8 Criticism
  * 9 See also
    * 9.1 Lists
    * 9.2 Terms based on open source
    * 9.3 Other
  * 10 References
  * 11 Further reading
  * 12 Literature on legal and economic aspects
  * 13 External links

  
## [edit] History

Main article: Open Source history

Very similar to open standards, researchers with access to the Advanced
Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET) used a process called Request for
Comments to develop telecommunication network protocols. Characterized by
contemporary open source work, this 1960s' collaborative process led to the
birth of the Internet in 1969. There are earlier instances of open source
movements and free software such as IBM's source releases of its operating
systems and other programs in the 1950s, 60s, and the SHARE user group that
formed to facilitate the exchange of software.[2][3]

The decision by some people in the free software movement to use the label
âopen sourceâ came out of a strategy session[4] held at Palo Alto,
California, in reaction to Netscape's January 1998 announcement of a source
code release for Navigator. The group of individuals at the session included
Christine Peterson who suggested âopen sourceâ, Todd Anderson, Larry
Augustin, Jon Hall, Sam Ockman, Michael Tiemann and Eric S. Raymond. They used
the opportunity before the release of Navigator's source code to free
themselves of the ideological and confrontational connotations of the term
free software. Netscape licensed and released its code as open source under
the Netscape Public License and subsequently under the Mozilla Public
License.[5]

The term was given a big boost at an event organized in April 1998 by
technology publisher Tim O'Reilly. Originally titled the âFreeware Summitâ
and later known as the âOpen Source Summitâ,[6] the event brought together
the leaders of many of the most important free and open source projects,
including Linus Torvalds, Larry Wall, Brian Behlendorf, Eric Allman, Guido van
Rossum, Michael Tiemann, Paul Vixie, Jamie Zawinski of Netscape, and Eric
Raymond. At that meeting, the confusion caused by the name âfree softwareâ
was brought up. Tiemann argued for âsourcewareâ as a new term, while
Raymond argued for âopen source.â The assembled developers took a vote,
and the winner was announced at a press conference that evening. Five days
later, Raymond made the first public call to the free software community to
adopt the new term.[7] The Open Source Initiative was formed shortly
thereafter.[4]

The Open Source Initiative (OSI) formed in February 1998 by Raymond and
Perens. With about 20 years of evidence from case histories of closed and open
development already provided by the Internet, the OSI continued to present the
'open source' case to commercial businesses. They sought to bring a higher
profile to the practical benefits of freely available source code, and wanted
to bring major software businesses and other high-tech industries into open
source. Perens adapted Debian's Free Software Guidelines to make the The Open
Source Definition.[8]

## [edit] Definitions

Main article: Open Source Definition

There are numerous groups who claim to own the term "Open Source", but in
reality the term has not been trademarked. The Open Source Initiative's
definition is widely recognized as the "real" definition.

### [edit] The Open Source Definition

The Open Source Definition is used by the Open Source Initiative to determine
whether or not a software license can be considered open source. The
definition was based on the Debian Free Software Guidelines, written and
adapted primarily by Bruce Perens.[9][10] Perens in turn based his writing on
the "four freedoms" of Free Software from the Free Software Foundation.[11]

### [edit] Perens' principles

Under Perens' definition, open source describes a broad general type of
software license that makes source code available to the general public with
relaxed or non-existent copyright restrictions. The principles, as stated, say
absolutely nothing about trademark or patent use and require absolutely no
cooperation to ensure that any common audit or release regime applies to any
derived works. It is an explicit âfeatureâ of open source that it may put
no restrictions on the use or distribution by any organization or user. It
forbids this, in principle, to guarantee continued access to derived works
even by the major original contributors.

## [edit] Proliferation of the term

While the term applied originally only to the source code of software,[12] it
is now being applied to many other areas such as open source ecology,[13] a
movement to decentralize technologies so that any human can use them. However,
it is often misapplied to other areas which have different and competing
principles, which overlap only partially.

Opponents of the spread of the label âopen source,â including Richard
Stallman, argue that the requirements and restrictions ensure the continuation
of the effort, and resist attempts to redefine the labels. He argues also that
most supporters of open source are actually supporters of much more equitable
agreements and support re-integration of derived works and that most
contributors do not intend to release their work to others who can extend it,
hide the extensions, patent those very extensions, and demand royalties or
restrict the use of all other usersâall while not violating the open source
principles with respect to the initial code they acquired.

## [edit] Non-software use

The principles of open source have been adapted for many other forms of user
generated content and technology, including open source hardware.

Supporters of the open content movement advocate some restrictions of use,
requirements to share changes, and attribution to other authors of the work.

This âcultureâ or ideology takes the view that the principles apply more
generally to facilitate concurrent input of different agendas, approaches and
priorities, in contrast with more centralized models of development such as
those typically used in commercial companies.[1]

Advocates of the open source principles often point to Wikipedia as an
example, but Wikipedia has in fact often restricted certain types of use or
user, and the GFDL license it uses makes specific requirements of all users,
which technically violates the open source principles.

### [edit] Business models

Main article: Business models for open source software

There are a number of commonly recognized barriers to the adoption of open
source software by enterprises. These barriers include the perception that
open source licenses are viral, lack of formal support and training, the
velocity of change, and a lack of a long term roadmap. The majority of these
barriers are risk-related. From the other side, not all proprietary projects
disclose exact future plans, not all open source licenses are equally viral
and many serious OSS projects (especially operating systems) actually make
money from paid support and documentation.

A commonly employed Business Strategy of Commercial Open Source Software Firms
is the Dual-License Strategy, as demonstrated by Ingres, MySQL, Alfresco, and
others.

## [edit] Widely-used open source products

Open source software (OSS) projects are built and maintained by a network of
volunteer programmers. Prime examples of open source products are the Apache
HTTP Server, the internet address system Internet Protocol, and the internet
browser Mozilla Firefox. One of the most successful open source products is
the GNU/Linux operating system, an open source Unix-like operating
system.[14][15]

## [edit] Society and culture

Open source culture is the creative practice of appropriation and free sharing
of found and created content. Examples include collage, found footage film,
music, and appropriation art. Open source culture is one in which fixations,
works entitled to copyright protection, are made generally available.
Participants in the culture can modify those products and redistribute them
back into the community or other organizations.

The rise of open-source culture in the 20th century resulted from a growing
tension between creative practices that involve appropriation, and therefore
require access to content that is often copyrighted, and increasingly
restrictive intellectual property laws and policies governing access to
copyrighted content. The two main ways in which intellectual property laws
became more restrictive in the 20th century were extensions to the term of
copyright (particularly in the United States) and penalties, such as those
articulated in the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), placed on attempts
to circumvent anti-piracy technologies.

Although artistic appropriation is often permitted under fair use doctrines,
the complexity and ambiguity of these doctrines creates an atmosphere of
uncertainty among cultural practitioners. Also, the protective actions of
copyright owners create what some call a "chilling effect" among cultural
practitioners.

In the late 20th century, cultural practitioners began to adopt the
intellectual property licensing techniques of free software and open-source
software to make their work more freely available to others, including the
Creative Commons.

The idea of an "open source" culture runs parallel to "Free Culture," but is
substantively different. Free culture is a term derived from the free software
movement, and in contrast to that vision of culture, proponents of Open Source
Culture (OSC) maintain that some intellectual property law needs to exist to
protect cultural producers. Yet they propose a more nuanced position than
corporations have traditionally sought. Instead of seeing intellectual
property law as an expression of instrumental rules intended to uphold either
natural rights or desirable outcomes, an argument for OSC takes into account
diverse goods (as in "the Good life") and ends.

One way of achieving the goal of making the fixations of cultural work
generally available is to maximally utilize technology and digital media. As
predicted by Moore's law, the cost of digital media and storage plummeted in
the late 20th Century. Consequently, the marginal cost of digitally
duplicating anything capable of being transmitted via digital media dropped to
near zero. Combined with an explosive growth in personal computer and
technology ownership, the result is an increase in general population's access
to digital media. This phenomenon facilitated growth in open source culture
because it allowed for rapid and inexpensive duplication and distribution of
culture. Where the access to the majority of culture produced prior to the
advent of digital media was limited by other constraints of proprietary and
potentially "open" mediums, digital media is the latest technology with the
potential to increase access to cultural products. Artists and users who
choose to distribute their work digitally face none of the physical
limitations that traditional cultural producers have been typically faced
with. Accordingly, the audience of an open source culture faces little
physical cost in acquiring digital media.

Open source culture precedes Richard Stallman's codification of the concept
with the creation of the Free Software Foundation. As the public began to
communicate through Bulletin Board Systems (BBS) like FidoNet, places like
Sourcery Systems BBS were dedicated to providing source code to Public Domain,
Shareware and Freeware programs.

Essentially born out of a desire for increased general access to digital
media, the Internet is open source culture's most valuable asset. It is
questionable whether the goals of an open source culture could be achieved
without the Internet. The global network not only fosters an environment where
culture can be generally accessible, but also allows for easy and inexpensive
redistribution of culture back into various communities. Some reasons for this
are as follows.

First, the Internet allows even greater access to inexpensive digital media
and storage. Instead of users being limited to their own facilities and
resources, they are granted access to a vast network of facilities and
resources, some for free. Sites such as Archive.org offer up free web space
for anyone willing to license their work under a Creative Commons license. The
resulting cultural product is then available to download for free (generally
accessible) to anyone with an Internet connection.

Second, users are granted unprecedented access to each other. Older analog
technologies such as the telephone or television have limitations on the kind
of interaction users can have. In the case of television there is little, if
any interaction between users participating on the network. And in the case of
the telephone, users rarely interact with any more than a couple of their
known peers. On the Internet, however, users have the potential to access and
meet millions of their peers. This aspect of the Internet facilitates the
modification of culture as users are able to collaborate and communicate with
each other across international and cultural boundaries. The speed in which
digital media travels on the Internet in turn facilitates the redistribution
of culture.

Through various technologies such as peer-to-peer networks and blogs, cultural
producers can take advantage of vast social networks in order to distribute
their products. As opposed to traditional media distribution, redistributing
digital media on the Internet can be virtually costless. Technologies such as
BitTorrent and Gnutella take advantage of various characteristics of the
Internet protocol (TCP/IP) in an attempt to totally decentralize file
distribution.

### [edit] Government

  * Open politics (sometimes known as Open source politics) â is a term used to describe a political process that uses Internet technologies such as blogs, email and polling to provide for a rapid feedback mechanism between political organizations and their supporters. There is also an alternative conception of the term Open source politics which relates to the development of public policy under a set of rules and processes similar to the Open Source Software movement.
  * Open source governance â is similar to open source politics, but it applies more to the democratic process and promotes the freedom of information.

### [edit] Ethics

Open Source ethics is split into two strands:

  * Open Source Ethics as an Ethical School - Charles Ess and David Berry are researching whether ethics can learn anything from an open source approach. Ess famously even defined the AoIR Research Guidelines as an example of open source ethics.[16]
  * Open Source Ethics as a Professional Body of Rules - This is based principally on the computer ethics school, studying the questions of ethics and professionalism in the computer industry in general and software development in particular.[17]

### [edit] Media

Open source journalism â referred to the standard journalistic techniques of
news gathering and fact checking, and reflected a similar term that was in use
from 1992 in military intelligence circles, open source intelligence. It is
now commonly used to describe forms of innovative publishing of online
journalism, rather than the sourcing of news stories by a professional
journalist. In the Dec 25, 2006 issue of TIME magazine this is referred to as
user created content and listed alongside more traditional open source
projects such as OpenSolaris and Linux.

Weblogs, or blogs, are another significant platform for open source culture.
Blogs consist of periodic, reverse chronologically ordered posts, using a
technology that makes webpages easily updatable with no understanding of
design, code, or file transfer required. While corporations, political
campaigns and other formal institutions have begun using these tools to
distribute information, many blogs are used by individuals for personal
expression, political organizing, and socializing. Some, such as LiveJournal
or WordPress, utilize open source software that is open to the public and can
be modified by users to fit their own tastes. Whether the code is open or not,
this format represents a nimble tool for people to borrow and re-present
culture; whereas traditional websites made the illegal reproduction of culture
difficult to regulate, the mutability of blogs makes "open sourcing" even more
uncontrollable since it allows a larger portion of the population to replicate
material more quickly in the public sphere.

Messageboards are another platform for open source culture. Messageboards
(also known as discussion boards or forums), are places online where people
with similar interests can congregate and post messages for the community to
read and respond to. Messageboards sometimes have moderators who enforce
community standards of etiquette such as banning users who are spammers. Other
common board features are private messages (where users can send messages to
one another) as well as chat (a way to have a real time conversation online)
and image uploading. Some messageboards use phpBB, which is a free open source
package. Where blogs are more about individual expression and tend to revolve
around their authors, messageboards are about creating a conversation amongst
its users where information can be shared freely and quickly. Messageboards
are a way to remove intermediaries from everyday life - for instance, instead
of relying on commercials and other forms of advertising, one can ask other
users for frank reviews of a product, movie or CD. By removing the cultural
middlemen, messageboards help speed the flow of information and exchange of
ideas.

OpenDocument is an open document file format for saving and exchanging
editable office documents such as text documents (including memos, reports,
and books), spreadsheets, charts, and presentations. Organizations and
individuals that store their data in an open format such as OpenDocument avoid
being locked in to a single software vendor, leaving them free to switch
software if their current vendor goes out of business, raises their prices,
changes their software, or changes their licensing terms to something less
favorable.

Open source movie production is either an open call system in which a changing
crew and cast collaborate in movie production, a system in which the end
result is made available for re-use by others or in which exclusively open
source products are used in the production. The 2006 movie Elephants Dream is
said to be the "world's first open movie"[18], created entirely using open
source technology.

An open source documentary film has a production process allowing the open
contributions of archival material, footage, and other filmic elements, both
in unedited and edited form. By doing so, on-line contributors become part of
the process of creating the film, helping to influence the editorial and
visual material to be used in the documentary, as well as its thematic
development. The first open source documentary film to go into production "The
American Revolution" [19]," which will examine the role that WBCN-FM in Boston
played in the cultural, social and political changes locally and nationally
from 1968 to 1974, is being produced by Lichtenstein Creative Media and the
non-profit The Fund for Independent Media. Open Source Cinema is a website to
create Basement Tapes, a feature documentary about copyright in the digital
age, co-produced by the National Film Board of Canada. Open Source Filmmaking
refers to a form of filmmaking that takes a method of idea formation from open
source software, but in this case the 'source' for a film maker is raw
unedited footage rather than programming code. It can also refer to a method
of filmmaking where the process of creation is 'open' i.e. a disparate group
of contributors, at different times contribute to the final piece.

Open-IPTV is IPTV that is not limited to one recording studio, production
studio, or cast. Open-IPTV uses the Internet or other means to pool efforts
and resources together to create an online community that all contributes to a
show.

### [edit] Education

Within the academic community, there is discussion about expanding what could
be called the "intellectual commons" (analogous to the Creative Commons).
Proponents of this view have hailed the Connexions Project at Rice University,
OpenCourseWare project at MIT, Eugene Thacker's article on "Open Source DNA",
the "Open Source Cultural Database" and Wikipedia as examples of applying open
source outside the realm of computer software.

Open source curricula are instructional resources whose digital source can be
freely used, distributed and modified.

Another strand to the academic community is in the area of research. Many
funded research projects produce software as part of their work. There is an
increasing interest in making the outputs of such projects available under an
open source license. In the UK the Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC)
has developed a policy on open source software. JISC also funds a development
service called OSS Watch which acts as an advisory service for higher and
further education institutions wishing to use, contribute to and develop open
source software.

### [edit] Innovation communities

The principle of sharing predates the open source movement; for example, the
free sharing of information has been institutionalized in the scientific
enterprise since at least the 19th century. Open source principles have always
been part of the scientific community. The sociologist Robert K. Merton
described the four basic elements of the community - universalism (an
international perspective), communism (sharing information), disinterestedness
(removing one's personal views from the scientific inquiry) and organized
skepticism (requirements of proof and review) that accurately describe the
scientific community today. These principles are, in part, complemented by US
law's focus on protecting expression and method but not the ideas themselves.
There is also a tradition of publishing research results to the scientific
community instead of keeping all such knowledge proprietary. One of the recent
initiatives in scientific publishing has been open access \- the idea that
research should be published in such a way that it is free and available to
the public. There are currently many open access journals where the
information is available for free online, however most journals do charge a
fee (either to users or libraries for access). The Budapest Open Access
Initiative is an international effort with the goal of making all research
articles available for free on the Internet. The National Institutes of Health
has recently proposed a policy on "Enhanced Public Access to NIH Research
Information." This policy would provide a free, searchable resource of NIH-
funded results to the public and with other international repositories six
months after its initial publication. The NIH's move is an important one
because there is significant amount of public funding in scientific research.
Many of the questions have yet to be answered - the balancing of profit vs.
public access, and ensuring that desirable standards and incentives do not
diminish with a shift to open access.

Farmavita.Net - Community of Pharmaceuticals Executives have recently proposed
new business model of Open Source Pharmaceuticals [20]. The project is
targeted to development and sharing of know-how for manufacture of essential
and life saving medicines. It is mainly dedicated to the countries with less
developed economies where local pharmaceutical research and development
resources are insufficient for national needs. It will be limited to generic
(off-patent) medicines with established use. By the definition, medicinal
product have a âwell-established useâ if is used for at least 15 years,
with recognized efficacy and an acceptable level of safety. In that event, the
expensive clinical test and trial results could be replaced by appropriate
scientific literature.

Benjamin Franklin was an early contributor eventually donating all his
inventions including the Franklin stove, bifocals and the lightning rod to the
public domain after successfully profiting off their sales and patents.

New NGO communities are starting to use the open source technology as a tool.
One example is the Open Source Youth Network started in 2007 in Lisboa by ISCA
members[21].

Open innovation is also a new emerging concept which advocate putting R&D in a
common pool, the Eclipse platform is openly presenting itself as an Open
innovation network [22]

### [edit] Arts and recreation

Copyright protection is used in the performing arts and even in athletic
activities. Some groups have attempted to remove copyright from such
practices.[23]

## [edit] Certification

In order to build higher user confidence, certification is mandatory.
Certification could be applied to the simplest component that can be used by
developers to build the simplest module to a whole software system. There have
been numerous institutions involving in this area of the open source software
including The International Institute of Software Technology / United Nations
University (http://www.iist.unu.edu). UNU/IIST is a non-profit research and
education institution of The United Nations. It is currently involved in a
project known as "The Global Desktop Project". This project aims to build a
desktop interface that every end-user is able to understand and interact with,
thus crossing the language and cultural barriers. It is drawing huge attention
from parties involved in areas ranging from application development to
localization. Furthermore, this project will improve developing nations'
access to information systems. UNU/IIST aims to achieve this without any
compromise in the quality of the software. It believes a global standard can
be maintained by introducing certifications and is currently organizing
conferences in order to explore frontiers in the field
(http://opencert.iist.unu.edu).

## [edit] Criticism

<IMG>

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2007)  
The criticisms of the specific Open Source Initiative (OSI) principles are
dealt with above as part of the definition and differentiation from other
terms. The open content movement does not recognize nor endorse the OSI
principles and embraces instead mutual share-alike agreements that require
derived works to be re-integrated and treated equitably, e.g. not patented or
trademarked to the detriment of the individual contributors/authors.

Another criticism of the Open Source movement is that these projects may not
be really as self-organizing as their proponents claim. This argument holds
that successful Open Source projects frequently have a strong central manager,
even if that manager is a volunteer. The article Open Source Projects Manage
Themselves? Dream On. by Chuck Connell explains this viewpoint. However this
is a criticism of the development model, not of the Open Source itself. Also,
the author does not state that self organization surely does not work, just
points to the cases when the central management was likely involved.

The legal and cultural criticisms are both addressed as part of a common set
of objections and criticisms by those who prefer share-alike as an organizing
principle. This includes the Creative Commons which simply ignores the OSI
principles and endorses licenses that clearly violate them such as the ability
to disallow commercial use or the preparation of derivative works.

Of the vocal critics, Richard Stallman of the Free Software Foundation (FSF),
flatly opposes the term âOpen Sourceâ being applied to what they refer to
as âfree softwareâ. Although it's clear that legally free software does
qualify as open source, he considers that the category is abusive. [24] They
also oppose the professed pragmatism of the Open Source Initiative, as they
fear that the free software ideals of freedom and community are threatened by
compromising on the FSF's idealistic standards for software freedom.[25][26]

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Free software portal  
Sister project Wikibooks has a book on the topic of

Open Source  
Sister project Look up open source in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
### [edit] Lists

  * Alphabetical list of open source games
  * List of commercial open source applications
  * List of open source healthcare software
  * List of open-source games by genre
  * List of open source software packages
  * List of trademarked open source software

### [edit] Terms based on open source

  * Open source governance
  * Open source software
  * Open source hardware
  * Open Source Initiative
  * Open-source license
  * Open source political campaign
  * Open source record label
  * Open source religion

### [edit] Other

  * Commons-based peer production
  * Commercial open source applications
  * Community source
  * Digital freedom
  * Embrace, extend and extinguish
  * Free Beer
  * Free software
  * Gift economy
  * Glossary of legal terms in technology
  * Halloween Documents
  * Linux
  * Network effect
  * Open access
  * Open content
  * Open data
  * Open design
  * OpenDWG
  * Open format
  * Open implementation
  * Open innovation
  * Open JDK
  * Open research
  * Open Solaris
  * Open Source as a Service
  * Open source vs. closed source
  * Open system (computing)
  * Open standard
  * Openness
  * Shared software
  * Shared source
  * Vendor lock-in

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Raymond, Eric S. The Cathedral and the Bazaar. ed 3.0. 2000.
  2. ^ Fisher, Franklin M.; James W. McKie, Richard B. Mancke (1983). IBM and the U.S. Data Processing Industry: An Economic History. Praeger. ISBN 0-03-063059-2. pages 172-179 IBM unbundled (began charging for) software June 23, 1969
  3. ^ Dave Pitts' IBM 7090 support â An example of distrbuted source: Page contains a link to IBM 7090/94 IBSYS source, including COBOL and FORTRAN compilers.
  4. ^ a b Tiemann, Michael (2006-09-19). "History of the OSI". Open Source Initiative. http://www.opensource.org/history. Retrieved on 2008-08-23.
  5. ^ Muffatto, Moreno (2006). Open Source: A Multidisciplinary Approach. Imperial College Press. ISBN 1860946658.
  6. ^ Open Source Summit Linux Gazette. 1998.
  7. ^ Goodbye, "free software"; hello, "open source"
  8. ^ Perens, Bruce. Open Sources: Voices from the Open Source Revolution. O'Reilly Media. 1999.
  9. ^ "The Open Source Definition by Bruce Perens". http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/opensources/book/perens.html. , Open Sources: Voices from the Open Source Revolution, January 1999, ISBN 1-56592-582-3
  10. ^ "The Open Source Definition". http://opensource.org/docs/osd. , The Open Source Definition according to the Open Source Initiative
  11. ^ http://news.slashdot.org/comments.pl?sid=1129863&cid=26875815
  12. ^ Stallman, Richard (2007-09-24). "Why âOpen Sourceâ misses the point of Free Software". Philosophy of the GNU Project. Free Software Foundation. http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/open-source-misses-the-point.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-06. "However, not all of the users and developers of free software agreed with the goals of the free software movement. In 1998, a part of the free software community splintered off and began campaigning in the name of âopen source.â The term was originally proposed to avoid a possible misunderstanding of the term âfree software,â but it soon became associated with philosophical views quite different from those of the free software movement."
  13. ^ "Open Source Ecology". http://www.openfarmtech.org. "...building the world's first replicable open source self-sufficient decentralized high-appropriate-tech permaculture ecovillage..."
  14. ^ Michael J. Gallivan, âStriking a Balance Between Trust and Control in a Virtual Organization: A Content Analysis of Open Source Software Case Studiesâ, Info Systems Journal 11 (2001): 277â304
  15. ^ Hal Plotkin, âWhat (and Why) you should know about open-source softwareâ Harvard Management Update 12 (1998): 8-9
  16. ^ Berry (2004) Internet Ethics: Privacy, Ethics and Alienation - An Open Source Approach. (PDF file)
  17. ^ El-Emam, K (2001). Ethics and Open Source. Empirical Software Engineering 6(4).
  18. ^ http://www.elephantsdream.org/
  19. ^ "The American Revolution
  20. ^ Open Source Pharmaceuticals http://www.farmavita.net/content/view/336/84/
  21. ^ ISCA - International Sport and Culture Association - Youth - Youth corner - Racism in football
  22. ^ http://www.eclipse.org/org/foundation/membersminutes/20070920MembersMeeting/07.09.12-Eclipse-Open-Innovation.pdf
  23. ^ Open Source Yoga Unity - Home
  24. ^ Stallman, Richard (2007-06-16). "Why âOpen Sourceâ misses the point of Free Software". Philosophy of the GNU Project. Free Software Foundation. http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/open-source-misses-the-point.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-23. "As the advocates of open source draw new users into our community, we free software activists have to work even more to bring the issue of freedom to those new users' attention. We have to say, âIt's free software and it gives you freedom!ââmore and louder than ever. Every time you say âfree softwareâ rather than âopen source,â you help our campaign."
  25. ^ Stallman, Richard (2007-06-19). "Why âFree Softwareâ is better than âOpen Sourceâ". Philosophy of the GNU Project. Free Software Foundation. http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-software-for-freedom.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-23. "Sooner or later these users will be invited to switch back to proprietary software for some practical advantage. Countless companies seek to offer such temptation, and why would users decline? Only if they have learned to value the freedom free software gives them, for its own sake. It is up to us to spread this ideaâand in order to do that, we have to talk about freedom. A certain amount of the âkeep quietâ approach to business can be useful for the community, but we must have plenty of freedom talk too."
  26. ^ Stallman, Richard (2007-06-16). "Why âOpen Sourceâ misses the point of Free Software". Philosophy of the GNU Project. Free Software Foundation. http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/open-source-misses-the-point.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-23. "Under the pressure of the movie and record companies, software for individuals to use is increasingly designed specifically to restrict them. This malicious feature is known as DRM, or Digital Restrictions Management (see DefectiveByDesign.org), and it is the antithesis in spirit of the freedom that free software aims to provide. [â¦] Yet some open source supporters have proposed âopen source DRMâ software. Their idea is that by publishing the source code of programs designed to restrict your access to encrypted media, and allowing others to change it, they will produce more powerful and reliable software for restricting users like you. Then it will be delivered to you in devices that do not allow you to change it. This software might be âopen source,â and use the open source development model; but it won't be free software, since it won't respect the freedom of the users that actually run it. If the open source development model succeeds in making this software more powerful and reliable for restricting you, that will make it even worse."

## [edit] Further reading

  * David M. Berry (2008). Copy, Rip, Burn: The Politics of Copyleft and Open Source. London:Pluto Press. http://www.amazon.com/Copy-Rip-Burn-Politics-Source/dp/0745324142.
  * Isaac Hunter Dunlap (2006). Open Source Database Driven Web Development. Oxford: Chandos. ISBN 1843341611. http://www.chandospublishing.com/chandos_publishing_record_detail.php?ID=98.
  * Ron Goldman and Richard P. Gabriel (2005). Innovation Happens Elsewhere. Richard P. Gabriel. ISBN 1558608893. http://dreamsongs.com./IHE/IHE.html.
  * Steven Weber (2005). The Success of Open Source. Harvard: Harvard University Press. http://www.amazon.com/Success-Open-Source-Steven-Weber/dp/0674018583/ref=ed_oe_p.
  * Producing Open Source Software (How to Run a Successful Free Software Project) - a book by Karl Fogel. Free PDF version available.
  * Andrew Hudson. Ubuntu Linux Starter Kit. http://www.informit.com/title/0672330601.

## [edit] Literature on legal and economic aspects

  * Benkler, Y. (2002): âCoase's Penguin, or, Linux and The Nature of the Firm." Yale Law Journal 112.3 (Dec 2002): p367(78) (in Adobe pdf format)
  * Berry, D. M & Moss, G. (2008). Libre Culture: Meditations on Free Culture. Canada: Pygmalion Books. (in Adobe pdf format)
  * Bitzer, J. & SchrÃ¶der, P. J.H. (2005): "The Impact of Entry and Competition by Open Source Software on Innovation Activity", Industrial Organization 0512001, EconWPA. (in Adobe pdf format)
  * v. Engelhardt, S. (2008): "The Economic Properties of Software", Jena Economic Research Papers, Volume 2 (2008), Number 2008-045. (in Adobe pdf format)
  * v. Engelhardt, S. (2008): "Intellectual Property Rights and Ex-Post Transaction Costs: the Case of Open and Closed Source Software", Jena Economic Research Papers 2008-047. (in Adobe pdf format)
  * v. Engelhardt, S. & Swaminathan, S. (2008): "Open Source Software, Closed Source Software or Both: Impacts on Industry Growth and the Role of Intellectual Property Rights", Discussion Papers of DIW Berlin 799. (in Adobe pdf format)
  * Feller, J., Fitzgerald, B. & Hissam, S. A. (eds), (2005): Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software, MIT Press.
  * Ghosh, R. A. (2006): Study on the: Economic impact of open source software on innovation and the competitiveness of the Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) sector in the EU
  * v. Hippel, E. & v. Krogh, G. (2003): âOpen source software and the "private-collective" innovation model: Issues for organization scienceâ, Organization Science 14(2), 209â223.
  * Lerner J. & Pathak P. A. & Tirole, J. (2006): "The Dynamics of Open Source Contributors", American Economic Review, vol. 96 (2), p. 114-118.
  * Lerner, J. & Tirole, J. (2002): âSome simple economics on open sourceâ, Journal of Industrial Economics 50(2), p 197â234. Download of an earlier version.
  * Lerner, J. & Tirole, J. (2005): "The Scope of Open Source Licensing", The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, vol. 21, p. 20-56.
  * Lerner, J. & Tirole, J. (2005): "The Economics of Technology Sharing: Open Source and Beyond", Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 19(2), p. 99-120.
  * Maurer, S. M. (2008): âOpen source biology: Finding a niche (or maybe several)â, UMKC Law Review 76(2). (download an online version) (in Adobe pdf format)
  * Osterloh, M. & Rota, S. (2007): "Open source software development--Just another case of collective invention?", Research Policy, vol. 36(2), pages 157-171. Download of an earlier version
  * Riehle, D. (2007): "The Economic Motivation of Open Source: Stakeholder Perspectives", IEEE Computer, vol. 40, no. 4 (April 2007), p. 25-32.
  * Rossi, M. A. (2006): Decoding the free/open source software puzzle: A survey of theoretical and empirical contributions, in J. Bitzer P. SchrÃ¶der, eds, âThe Economics of Open Source Software Developmentâ, p 15â55. (download an online version) (in Adobe pdf format)
  * Schiff, A. (2002): "The Economics of Open Source Software: A Survey of the Early Literature," Review of Network Economics, vol. 1(1), p 66-74.

## [edit] External links

  * An open-source shot in the arm? The Economist, Jun 10th 2004,
  * SDForum Distinguished Speaker talks on Open Source Software by Guido van Rossum, Howard Rheingold, and Bruce Perens, 2005.
  * SDForum Global Open Source, March 24, 2008
  * Machine Learning Open Source Software
  * Microsoft and Open Source (Interview Hans Bos from Microsoft)
  * Open Source Utils
  * Google-O'Reilly Open Source Awards
  * QualiPSo European Initiative
  * International Institute for Software Technology / United Nations University
  * UNU/IIST Open Source Software Certification
  * Open Source Culture
  * Calls for open source government
  * Iranian Open Source Development
  * Open Source Ecology

v â¢ d â¢ e

Free and open source software  
General

Copyleft Â· Events and Awards Â· Free software Â· Free Software Definition Â·
Gratis versus Libre Â· Open source software

<IMG> Free software  
portal  
Notable packages

Apache Â· CUPS Â· Firefox Â· GNOME Â· KDE Â· OpenOffice.org Â· Thunderbird Â·
X Window System  
Operating systems

AROS Â· BSD Â· Darwin Â· FreeDOS Â· GNU Â· Haiku Â· Inferno Â· Linux Â· Mach
Â· MINIX Â· OpenSolaris Â· Plan 9 Â· ReactOS Â· Syllable  
Development

GCC Â· LLVM Â· Java Â· Open64 Â· Perl Â· PHP Â· Python Â· Lua Â· Ruby Â· Tcl
Â· libJIT  
History

GNU Â· Linux Â· Mozilla (Application Suite Â· Firefox Â· Thunderbird)  
Organizations

Apache Software Foundation Â· Blender Foundation Â· Eclipse Foundation Â·
FLOSS Manuals Â· freedesktop.org Â· Free Software Foundation Â· GNOME
Foundation Â· GNU Project Â· Google Code Â· Linux Foundation Â· Mozilla
Foundation Â· Open Source Geospatial Foundation Â· Open Source Initiative Â·
SourceForge Â· Xiph.Org Foundation Â· X.Org Foundation  
Licences

Apache Â· BSD Â· GNU GPL Â· LGPL Â· MIT Â· MPL Â· Permissive Â· Microsoft
Public License Â· Microsoft Reciprocal License Â· FSF approved licenses  
Challenges

Binary blob Â· Digital rights management Â· License proliferation Â· Mozilla
software rebranding Â· Proprietary software Â· SCO-Linux controversies Â·
Security Â· Software patents Â· Tivoization Â· Trusted Computing  
Other topics

Alternative terms Â· Community Â· Linux distribution Â· Forking Â· Movement Â·
Microsoft Open Specification Promise Â· Revolution OS Â· Comparison with
closed source  
List of open source software packages  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_source"

Categories: Computer law | Intellectual property law | Free software culture
and documents | Social information processing | Standardization

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 06:13.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



