
# Mandriva Linux

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Mandriva Linux <IMG>  
<IMG>  
Mandriva Linux 2009  
Company / developer Mandriva  
OS family Unix-like  
Working state Current  
Initial release 23 July 1998 (1998-07-23)  
Latest stable release 2009.0 / 2008-10-09; 180 days ago  
Package manager urpmi  
Kernel type Monolithic  
Default user interface KDE / GNOME  
License Mainly the GNU GPL / Various others  
Website www.mandriva.com  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Mandriva Linux showing the menu and the control panel (in French)

Mandriva Linux (formerly Mandrakelinux or Mandrake Linux) is an operating
system created by Mandriva (formerly Mandrakesoft). It uses the RPM Package
Manager. The product lifetime of Mandriva Linux releases is 18 months for base
updates (kernel, drivers etc.) and 12 months for desktop updates (window
managers, desktop environments, web browsers etc.) . Server products receive
full updates for at least 24 months after their release.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Name changes
  * 2 Features
    * 2.1 Installation, control and administration
    * 2.2 Desktops
    * 2.3 Themes
    * 2.4 Package manager
    * 2.5 Live USB
  * 3 Availability
  * 4 Versions
    * 4.1 Latest version
    * 4.2 Development version
    * 4.3 Table of versions
  * 5 Editions
    * 5.1 Mandriva Linux Free
    * 5.2 Mandriva Linux One
    * 5.3 Mandriva Linux Powerpack
    * 5.4 Discontinued
      * 5.4.1 Mandriva Linux Discovery
      * 5.4.2 Mandriva Linux Powerpack+
  * 6 Derivatives
    * 6.1 Current Derivatives
      * 6.1.1 Mandriva Flash
      * 6.1.2 Mandriva Corporate Server
      * 6.1.3 Mandriva Corporate Desktop
    * 6.2 Discontinued Derivatives
      * 6.2.1 Multi Network Firewall
      * 6.2.2 GlobeTrotter
      * 6.2.3 Gaming edition
      * 6.2.4 CLIC
      * 6.2.5 Mandrake Move
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] History

The first release was based on Red Hat Linux (version 5.1) and KDE (version
1.0) in July 1998. It has since diverged from Red Hat and has included a
number of original tools mostly to ease system configuration. Mandriva Linux
was originated by GaÃ«l Duval, and intended to focus on ease of use for new
users.[2] Duval was also a co-founder of Mandrakesoft, but was laid off from
the company in 2006.[citation needed]

### [edit] Name changes

From its inception to version 8.0, Mandrake named its flagship distribution
Linux-Mandrake. From version 8.1 to 9.2 it was called Mandrake Linux.

In February 2004 MandrakeSoft lost a court case against Hearst Corporation,
owners of King Features Syndicate. Hearst contended that MandrakeSoft
infringed upon King Features' trademarked character Mandrake the Magician. As
a precaution, MandrakeSoft renamed its products by removing the space between
the brand name and the product name and changing the first letter of the
product name to lower case, thus creating one word. Starting from version
10.0, Mandrake Linux became known as Mandrakelinux, and its logo changed
accordingly. Similarly, MandrakeMove became Mandrakemove.

In April 2005 Mandrakesoft announced the corporate acquisition of Conectiva, a
Brazilian based company that produced a Linux distribution for Portuguese-
speaking (Brazil) and Spanish-speaking Latin America. As a result of this
acquisition and the legal dispute with Hearst Corporation, Mandrakesoft
announced that the new company name would be Mandriva, and that Mandriva Linux
would be the new name covering products.[3]

## [edit] Features

The major features of Mandriva Linux are:

### [edit] Installation, control and administration

Mandriva Linux contains the Mandriva Control Center, which eases configuration
of some settings. It has many programs known as Drakes or Draks, collectively
named drakxtools, to configure many different settings. Examples include
MouseDrake to set up a mouse, DiskDrake to set up disk partitions and
drakconnect to set up a network connection. They are written using GTK+ and
Perl, and most of them can run in both graphical and text mode using the
ncurses interface.

### [edit] Desktops

Mandriva Linux is geared to use KDE or GNOME as the standard desktops, but
includes others such as Xfce and twm.

### [edit] Themes

A unique theme provides consistency between applications and desktop
environments. Mandrakegalaxy debuted in version 9.1 and Mandrakegalaxy II
appeared in 10.0. A variant of Mandrakegalaxy is "Mandrakegalaxy Squared",
which uses square window buttons rather than round ones. A new default theme
named "Ia Ora" was introduced with the release of Mandriva Linux 2007, but
"Galaxy" remains available as an option for those who prefer it.

### [edit] Package manager

<IMG>

<IMG>

Rpmdrake, Mandriva's graphical package manager

Mandriva Linux uses a package manager called urpmi, which functions as a
wrapper to the RPM package management system. It is similar to apt-get or
Yellow dog Updater, Modified in that it allows seamless installation of a
given software package by automatically installing the other packages needed.
It is also media-transparent due to its ability to retrieve packages from
various media, including network/Internet, CD/DVD and local disk. Urpmi also
has an easy-to-use graphical front-end called rpmdrake, which is integrated
into the Mandriva Control Center.

Remote sources for urpmi / rpmdrake can be added during the installation of
recent Mandriva Linux versions. After installation, they can be added through
an option in the Software Sources Manager, or by using console commands
generated either manually or by one of several helper sites such as Easy
URPMI. This functionality allows the user to choose some or all of the various
software repositories available for their version of Mandriva Linux and can
greatly expand the amount of software that the user can install through the
urpmi system. Instructions on adding repositories and installing software can
be found on the Mandriva Wiki.

### [edit] Live USB

A Live USB of Mandriva Linux can be created manually or with UNetbootin.[4]

## [edit] Availability

Mandriva provides multiple editions of Linux. Some are freely-distributable,
while others are sold online and via a network of authorized resellers.

## [edit] Versions

Since 2007, Mandriva is released on a 6-month fixed-release cycle, similar to
Ubuntu and Fedora. However, while newer features are added per release, the
core internals[clarification needed] of the Spring release are the same as the
first release, so as to ensure the stability of a yearly release.[5]

### [edit] Latest version

The latest stable version is Mandriva Linux 2009 (2009.0), released on
2008-10-09.

### [edit] Development version

The development tree of Mandriva Linux has always been known as Cooker.[6]
This tree is directly released as a new stable version.

The current release is named 2009.0 and was released in October 2008.

### [edit] Table of versions

Year Number Name  
1998 5.1 Venice  
1998 5.2 Leeloo  
1999 5.3 Festen  
1999 6.0 Venus  
1999 6.1 Helios  
2000 7.0 Air  
2000 7.1 Helium  
2000 7.2 Odyssey (called Ulysses during beta)  
2001 8.0 Traktopel  
2001 8.1 Vitamin  
2002 8.2 Bluebird  
2002 9.0 Dolphin  
2003 9.1 Bamboo  
2003 9.2 FiveStar  
2004 10.0 Community and Official  
2004 10.1 Community  
2004 10.1 Official  
2005 10.2 Limited Edition 2005  
2005 2006.0 Mandriva Linux 2006  
2006 2007 Mandriva Linux 2007  
2007 2007.1 Mandriva Linux 2007 Spring  
2007 2008.0 Mandriva Linux 2008  
2008 2008.1 Mandriva Linux 2008 Spring  
2008 2009.0 Mandriva Linux 2009  
## [edit] Editions

Each release of Mandriva Linux is split into several different editions. Each
edition is derived from the same master tree, most of which is available on
the public mirrors: all free / open source software, and all non-free software
which is under a license that allows unrestricted distribution to the general
public, is available from the public mirrors. Only commercial software under a
license that does not allow unrestricted distribution to the general public
(but for which Mandriva has negotiated an agreement to distribute it with paid
copies) is not available from public mirrors.

### [edit] Mandriva Linux Free

Mandriva Linux Free is a 'traditional' distribution (i.e. one that comes with
a dedicated installer,[7] named DrakX, which is first used to install the
distribution to the hard disk of the computer before it is run). It is 'free'
in both senses: it consists entirely of free and open-source software, and it
is made available for public download at no charge. It is usually available in
CD (three or four discs) and DVD editions for x86 32- and 64-bit CPU
architectures. It is aimed at users to whom software freedom is important, and
also at users who prefer a traditional installer to the installable live CD
system used by One. The package selection is tailored towards regular desktop
use. It consists of a subset of packages from the 'main' and 'contrib'
sections of the master tree.

### [edit] Mandriva Linux One

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mandriva One's Live CD

Mandriva Linux One is free to download. It is a hybrid, being both a Live CD
and an installer (with an installation wizard that includes disk partitioning
tools).

Several Mandriva Linux One versions were provided for each Mandriva Linux
release preceding Mandriva 2008. Users could choose between different human
languages, select either the KDE or GNOME desktops and include or exclude non-
free (as in speech) software. (It is not possible to fit both KDE and GNOME
desktops, or more than a few languages, on a single live CD.) The 'lead'
version is the KDE version[citation needed] with non-free software included.
The One images consist of a subset of packages from the 'main', 'contrib' and
'non-free' sections of the master tree, with the documentation files stripped
from the packages to save space.

Mandriva Linux One 2008 has a smaller range of versions. There are KDE and
GNOME versions with the default set of languages. There are also two KDE
versions with alternative sets of languages. All versions include non-free
software.

### [edit] Mandriva Linux Powerpack

Mandriva Linux Powerpack is a 'traditional' distribution (i.e. one that comes
with a dedicated installer - named DrakX - which is first used to install the
distribution to the hard disk of the computer before it is run). It is the
main commercial edition of Mandriva Linux, and as such, requires payment for
its use. It contains several non-free packages intended to add value for the
end user, including non-free drivers like the NVIDIA and ATI graphics card
drivers, non-free firmware for wireless chips and modems, some browser plugins
such as Java and Flash, and some full applications such as Cedega, Adobe
Reader and RealPlayer. It is sold directly from the Mandriva Store website and
through authorized resellers. It is also made available via a subscription
service, which allows unlimited downloads of Powerpack editions for the last
few Mandriva releases for a set yearly fee. It consists of a subset of
packages from the 'main', 'contrib', 'non-free' and 'restricted' sections of
the master tree.

In Mandriva Linux 2008, the Discovery and Powerpack+ editions have been merged
into Powerpack, which will become Mandriva's only commercial offering. Users
will be able to choose between a novice-friendly Discovery-like setup or an
installation process and desktop aimed at power users.

### [edit] Discontinued

#### [edit] Mandriva Linux Discovery

Mandriva Linux Discovery was a commercial distribution aimed at first-time and
novice Linux users. It was sold via the Mandriva Store website and authorized
resellers, or could be downloaded by some subscribers to the Mandriva Club.
Mandriva Linux 2008 does not include a Discovery edition, having added
optional novice-friendly features to the Powerpack edition.

In releases prior to Mandriva Linux 2007, Discovery was a 'traditional'
distribution built on the DrakX installer. In Mandriva Linux 2007 and 2007
Spring, Discovery is a hybrid "Live DVD" which can be booted without
installation or installed to hard disk in the traditional manner.

Discovery was a DVD rather than a CD, allowing all languages to be provided on
one disc. It consisted of a subset of packages from the 'main', 'contrib',
'non-free' and 'non-free-restricted' sections of the master tree. The package
selection was tailored towards novice desktop users. A theme chosen to be
appealing to novice users was used, and the 'simplified' menu layout in which
applications are described rather than named and not all applications are
included was the default (for all other editions, the default menu layout was
the 'traditional' layout, where all graphical applications installed on the
system were included and were listed by name).

#### [edit] Mandriva Linux Powerpack+

Mandriva Linux Powerpack+ was a version of Powerpack with additional packages,
mostly commercial software. Like Powerpack, it was sold directly from the
Mandriva Store website and through authorized resellers; it was also a free
download for Mandriva Club members of the Gold level and above. Powerpack+ was
aimed at SOHO (small office / home office) users, with the expectation that it
could be used to run a small home or office server machine as well as desktop
and development workstations. The package selection was tailored with this in
mind, including a wide range of server packages. It consisted of a subset of
packages from the 'main', 'contrib', 'non-free' and 'restricted' sections of
the master tree.

Mandriva 2008 no longer includes a Powerpack+ edition; instead, the Powerpack
edition includes all the available packages.

## [edit] Derivatives

Derivatives are distributions that are based on Mandriva Linux, some by
Mandriva itself, others by independent projects. Some maintain compatibility
with Mandriva Linux, so that installing a Mandriva Linux RPM also works on the
offspring.

### [edit] Current Derivatives

#### [edit] Mandriva Flash

Mandriva Flash is a pre-installed Mandriva Linux distribution on a 8GB USB
key.[8] The user can choose how much space is used for system files and how
much is reserved for user files. An earlier version of Mandriva Flash was 4GB
and before that 2GB in size with fixed ratios. It can be booted directly from
the key on systems that support booting from USB devices, or from a
'kickstart' CD (the image for the CD is provided with the Flash) on systems
that do not. Flash runs faster than live CDs due to the relative speed of
flash memory, and the read/write nature of the medium allows users to save
files, configuration options and even to install new packages.

#### [edit] Mandriva Corporate Server

Mandriva Corporate Server is a distribution specifically tailored for
enterprise-level general purpose server usage. Development is started from the
basis of a previous Mandriva Linux release, with the package selection
altered, important packages updated, certain extra configuration tools and
applications added, and some extra support for enterprise-level hardware. The
maintenance lifetime of each release is five years. The current release of
Corporate Server is 4.0.

#### [edit] Mandriva Corporate Desktop

Mandriva Corporate Desktop is the desktop counterpart to Corporate Server.
Again it is based on a Mandriva Linux release with enterprise-specific
modifications and a five-year maintenance lifetime. The current release of
Corporate Desktop is 4.0.

### [edit] Discontinued Derivatives

#### [edit] Multi Network Firewall

Linux Mandrake 7.2 had a version tailored specifically for use as a firewall,
known as Single Network Firewall (SNF). Its successor, based on Mandrake 8.2,
was titled Multi Network Firewall (MNF). The third iteration is named MNF 2
and is based upon Mandrakelinux 10.0.

These firewall distributions are designed to provide security for computer
networks, and can be administered remotely via a browser-based interface or
Secure Shell. MNF 2 is now counted as part of the Corporate product line and
can only be bought, with support, from Mandriva.

#### [edit] GlobeTrotter

GlobeTrotter is a LaCie mobile USB drive loaded with a specific version of
Mandriva Linux. Like Move, it can boot most PCs into Linux without installing
first. The 40 GB hard drive makes it a convenient way to carry a Linux
workstation around. GlobeTrotter was launched in August 2003 and can be
ordered through Mandriva's online store. It is now superseded by Mandriva
Flash and Linutop[citation needed].

#### [edit] Gaming edition

Mandrake Linux 8.1 had a Gaming Edition, which was a game oriented Linux
distribution. It had a port of The Sims using the Transgaming WineX
technology.

#### [edit] CLIC

CLIC (aka Cluster LInux pour le Calcul) is a dedicated version of
Mandrakelinux created by MandrakeSoft specifically for clustering
environments. It was sponsored by the RNTL, other partners were ID-IMAG,
Groupe Bull and Mandrakesoft. This project's aim was to produce a HPC Linux
Distribution for 32- and 64-bit processors.

The objective of project CLIC was to allow the realization of large scientific
computers while being based on free software. The objective consists of the
realization a Linux distribution for clusters of machines, meeting the needs
for deployment, administration and programming of clusters within the
framework of exploitation for intensive calculation.

It features an automated installation of a full cluster using the Ka tools,
urpmi and the clusterscripts.

This project was finished on 1 December 2003 and Mandrakesoft decided to
continue that project with a product called Mandrake Linux Clustering. This
product included Drakcluster (GUI) for improved usability. It was dedicated to
the HPC market but it could also be used (with some modifications) to all
kinds of clusters (such as High Availability, applicative or grid). It
features parallel commands (bash, copying tools), deployment (disks), software
upgrade/downgrade (urpmi parallel), monitoring (ganglia), etc. Clustering was
available on x86 and x86-64 architectures.

#### [edit] Mandrake Move

A LiveMove is the set formed by a Live CD and a bootfloppy or USB flash drive.

Mandrake Move was a Mandriva product that benefits from a Mandrake Linux Live
CD which doesn't need to be installed to run on a computer, and a USB key that
automatically records bootloader, hardware configuration and personal data.

The first version of Mandrake Move was released in December 2003 (but only
distributed to customers in January 2004, due to production delays). It
brought two main innovations compared to competitors:

  * ability to eject the cdrom if the machine has 256 MB of RAM or more (Knoppix also can, but needs to copy the whole cdrom into RAM, therefore needs a machine with 1 GB of RAM or more), and continue to operate in a "downgraded" mode allowing only to play multimedia files

  * transparent save of any user modification of his/her own files and system configuration files, if operated with a USB key

The second version, now simply called Move, was released in October 2004.
Hardware support and stability have seen much improvement. Move is now
superseded by Mandriva One and Mandriva Flash.

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Free software portal  
  * MCNLive, a fork
  * PCLinuxOS, another fork

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Mandriva Product Lifetime Policy". Mandriva. http://www.mandriva.com/en/mandriva-product-lifetime-policy/. Retrieved on 2009-03-02 {{{accessyear}}}.
  2. ^ "LINUX - MANDRAKE". Linux Weekly News. http://lwn.net/1998/0730/a/mandrake.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-01 {{{accessyear}}}.
  3. ^ "Behind the New Mandriva". linuxplanet.com. http://linuxplanet.com/linuxplanet/reports/5811/1/. Retrieved on 2008-03-01 {{{accessyear}}}.
  4. ^ "UNetbootin - Universal Netboot In". SourceForge.net. http://unetbootin.sourceforge.net/. Retrieved on 2008-09-01 {{{accessyear}}}.
  5. ^ "New release cycle announced". http://club.mandriva.com/xwiki/bin/view/Main/NewReleaseCycle. Retrieved on 2008-04-22 {{{accessyear}}}.
  6. ^ "Development - Mandriva Community Wiki". wiki.mandriva.com. http://wiki.mandriva.com/en/Development. Retrieved on 2008-03-01 {{{accessyear}}}.
  7. ^ "Free Software / Open Source Software". mandriva.com. http://www.mandriva.com/en/community/free-software. Retrieved on 2008-03-01 {{{accessyear}}}.
  8. ^ http://store.mandriva.com/product_info.php?products_id=394&language=en 1st of August 2008

## [edit] External links

  * Mandriva Linux
  * Mandriva Linux at DistroWatch

v â¢ d â¢ e

Operating systems that offer the Xfce desktop  
ALT Linux Â· Debian Â· Dreamlinux Â· Dyne:bolic Â· Fedora Â· FreeSBIE Â·
Gentoo Linux Â· Granular Linux Â· GrumpyLinux Â· KateOS Â· Linpus Linux Â·
Linux From Scratch Â· Linux Mint Â· Mandriva Linux Â· Myah OS Â· Mythbuntu Â·
PC/OS Â· SAM Linux Â· Sidux Â· Slackware Â· SLAX Â· VectorLinux Â· Wolvix Â·
Xubuntu Â· Zenwalk Linux  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Linux distributions  
Arch Linux Â· CentOS Â· Debian Â· Fedora Â· Gentoo Â· Knoppix Â· Mandriva
Linux Â· Red Hat Enterprise Linux Â· Slackware Â· SUSE Â· Ubuntu Â· moreâ¦  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mandriva_Linux"

Categories: Linux distributions | RPM-based Linux distributions | Mandriva
Linux | X86-64 Linux distributions

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia
articles needing clarification from May 2008 | Articles with unsourced
statements since April 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since
December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 20 March 2009, at 21:44.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



