
# curses (programming library)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

curses is a terminal control library for Unix-like systems, enabling the
construction of text user interface (TUI) applications.

curses is a pun on the term "cursor optimization". It is a library of
functions that manage an application's display on character-cell terminals
(e.g., VT100).[1]

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 pcurses and PDcurses
    * 1.2 ncurses
  * 2 Overview
  * 3 Portability
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] History

The first curses library was written by Ken Arnold and originally released
with BSD UNIX, where it was used for several games, most notably Rogue. [2]
[3] [4]

The name "curses" is a pun on cursor optimization.[5] Sometimes it is
incorrectly stated that curses was used by the vi editor. In fact the code in
curses that optimizes moving the cursor from one place on the screen to
another was borrowed from vi, which predated curses.[3]

curses was originally implemented using the termcap library.[citation needed]
A few years later, Mark Horton, who had made improvements to the vi and
termcap sources at Berkeley, went to AT&T and made a different version using
terminfo, which became part of UNIX System III. Due to licensing restrictions
on the latter, the BSD and UNIX versions of the library were developed
independently. In addition to the termcap/terminfo improvement, other
improvements were made in the UNIX version:

  * video highlighting (bold, underline). The BSD version supported only standout.
  * line-drawing. The BSD version gave little support here.
  * colors. This was not anticipated in the BSD version.

### [edit] pcurses and PDcurses

Main article: PDCurses

Some improvements were made to the BSD library in the 1990s as "BSD 4.4"
curses, e.g., to provide more than one type of video highlighting.[citation
needed] However, those are not widely used. Rather, a different line of
development started by imitating the UNIX curses, from at least two
implementations: pcurses by Pavel Curtis (started in 1982) and PDCurses
(Public Domain curses) by Mark Hessling to support his editor THE (started in
1987).

### [edit] ncurses

Main article: ncurses

ncurses (new curses) development started in 1991 or 1992 using pcurses and was
first announced in 1993[6] as noted on the ncurses homepage. While development
of ncurses and PDCurses continues, UNIX curses development appears to have
halted in the mid-1990s when X/Open Curses was defined. [7] ncurses is the
most widely known implementation of curses, and has motivated further
development of other variations, such as BSD curses in the NetBSD project. [8]
[9]

## [edit] Overview

The curses API is described in several places.[10] Most implementations of
curses use a database that can describe the capabilities of thousands of
different terminals. There are a few implementations, such as PDCurses, which
use specialized device drivers rather than a terminal database. Most
implementations use terminfo, some use termcap. Curses has the advantage of
back-portability to character-cell terminals and simplicity. For an
application that does not require bit-mapped graphics or multiple fonts, an
interface implementation using curses will usually be much simpler and faster
than one using an X toolkit.

Using curses, programmers are able to write text-based applications without
writing directly for any specific terminal type. The curses library on the
executing system sends the correct control characters based on the terminal
type. It provides an abstraction of one or more windows that maps onto the
terminal screen. Each window is represented by a character matrix. The
programmer sets up each window to look as they want the display to look, and
then tells the curses package to update the screen. The library determines a
minimal set of changes needed to update the display and then executes these
using the terminal's specific capabilities and control sequences.

In short, this means that the programmer simply creates a character matrix of
how the screen should look and lets curses handle the work.

## [edit] Portability

Although the ncurses library was initially developed under Linux, OpenBSD,
FreeBSD, and NetBSD it has been ported to many other ANSI/POSIX UNIX systems,
mainly by Thomas Dickey. PDCurses, while not identical to ncurses, uses the
same function calls and operates the same way as ncurses does except that
PDCurses targets different devices, e.g., console windows for DOS, Win32,
OS/2, as well as X11. Porting between the two is not difficult. For example,
the roguelike game ADOM was written for Linux and ncurses, later ported to DOS
and PDCurses.[11][12]

## [edit] See also

  * conio â a similar idea, for DOS
  * ncurses \- New version of curses
  * termcap â a database
  * terminfo â a terminal database
  * S-Lang â an interpreted language with some related features
  * SMG$ â a similar idea, for OpenVMS
  * Shell curses \- Shell code function library similar to Curses

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Thomas E. Dickey. "NCURSES - Frequently Asked Questions". http://invisible-island.net/ncurses/ncurses.faq.html.
  2. ^ Peter H. Salus (October 1994). "The history of Unix is as much about collaboration as it is about technology". Byte. http://www.byte.com/art/9410/sec8/art3.htm.
  3. ^ a b Arnold, K. C. R. C. (1977), Screen Updating and Cursor Movement Optimization: A Library Package., University of California, Berkeley
  4. ^ Kenneth C. R. C. Arnold; Elan Amir (December 1992). ""Screen Updating and Cursor Movement Optimization: A Library Package". http://www.mirbsd.org/cman/manPSD/19.curses.htm.
  5. ^ Thomas E. Dickey. "NCURSES - Frequently Asked Questions". http://invisible-island.net/ncurses/ncurses.faq.html#what_is_it.
  6. ^ Thomas E. Dickey (December 1996). "NCURSES - New Curses". http://invisible-island.net/ncurses/.
  7. ^ X/Open Curses "X/Open Curses, Issue 4 Version 2, Reference Pages". The Open Group. 1997. http://www.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/007908799/cursesix.html X/Open Curses.
  8. ^ NetBSD project (February 2004). "CURSES_SCREEN(3), NetBSD Library Functions Manual". http://www.daemon-systems.org/man/curses_screen.3.html.
  9. ^ Ruibiao Qiu (September 2005). "NetBSD-SoC: Wide Character Support in NetBSD curses Library". http://netbsd-soc.sourceforge.net/projects/wcurses/.
  10. ^ John Strang, Programming with curses, O'Reilly, ISBN 0-937175-02-1
  11. ^ Thomas Biskup (1994-2007). "ADOM - The Past". http://www.adom.de/adom/past.php3. Retrieved on 2007-11-16.
  12. ^ Thomas Biskup (March 15, 1996). "New Game: ADOM (MS-DOS, MS-Windows, and Linux only)". rec.games.roguelike.announce. (Web link). Retrieved on 2007-11-16.

## [edit] External links

  * NCURSES - Manual Pages
  * Curses tutorial (PDF format)
  * Public Domain Curses
  * Interface for Rexx programmers
  * Tcl Toolkit
  * X/Open Curses

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curses_(programming_library)"

Categories: Unix software | Text user interface | Curses (programming library)

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since August 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 22 March 2009, at 00:29 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



