
# Free software movement

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The free software movement (abbreviated FSM) is a social movement which aims
to promote user's rights to access and modify software. The alternative terms
"libre software", "open source", and "FOSS" are associated with the free
software movement. Although drawing on traditions and philosophies among
members of the 1970s hacker culture, Richard Stallman is widely credited with
launching the movement in 1983 by founding the GNU Project.[1]

The free software philosophy at the core of the movement drew on core and
incidental elements of what was called hacker culture by many computer users
in the 1970s, among other sources.

## Contents

  * 1 Philosophy
  * 2 Actions
    * 2.1 Writing and spreading free software
    * 2.2 Building awareness
  * 3 Legislation
  * 4 Internal conflict
    * 4.1 Open source
    * 4.2 Stallman and Torvalds
  * 5 Measures of progress
  * 6 Criticism and controversy
    * 6.1 Is something impeding progress?
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 Further reading
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Philosophy

Stallman founded the Free Software Foundation in 1985 to support the movement.
The philosophy of the movement is to give freedom to computer users by
replacing proprietary software under restrictive licensing terms with free
software,[2] with the ultimate goal of liberating everyone "in cyberspace"[3]
â that is, every computer user.

Members of the free software movement believe that all users of software
should have the freedoms listed in the free software definition. Many hold
that it is immoral to prohibit or prevent people from exercising these
freedoms and that these freedoms are required to create a decent society where
software users can help each other, and to have control over their
computers.[4]

Some adherents to the free software movement do not believe that proprietary
software is strictly immoral.[5] They argue freedom is valuable (both socially
and pragmatically) as a property of software in its own right, separate from
technical quality in a narrow sense.

The Free Software Foundation also believes all software needs free
documentation (in particular because conscientious programmers should be able
to update manuals to reflect modification that they made to the software), but
deems the freedom to modify less important for other types of written
works.[6] Within the free software movement, the Floss manuals foundation
specializes on the goal of providing such documentation. Members of the free
software movement advocate that works which serve a practical purpose should
also be free.[citation needed]

## [edit] Actions

### [edit] Writing and spreading free software

The initial work of the free software movement focused on software
development.

The free software movement also rejects proprietary software, refusing to
install software that does not give them the freedoms of free software.
According to Stallman, "The only thing in the software field that is worse
than an unauthorised copy of a proprietary program, is an authorised copy of
the proprietary program because this does the same harm to its whole community
of users, and in addition, usually the developer, the perpetrator of this
evil, profits from it."[7]

### [edit] Building awareness

<IMG>

<IMG>

Some supporters of the free software movement take up public speaking, or host
a stall at software-related conferences to raise awareness of software
freedom. This is seen as important since people who receive free software, but
who are not aware that it is free software, will later accept a non-free
replacement or will add software which is not free software. [8]

## [edit] Legislation

A lot of lobbying work has been done against software patents and expansions
of copyright law.

The Venezuelan government implemented a free software law in January 2006.
Decree No. 3,390 mandated all government agencies to migrate to free software
over a two-year period.[9]

Congressmen Dr Edgar David Villanueva and Jacques Rodrich Ackerman have been
instrumental in introducing in Republic of Peru bill 1609 on "Free Software in
Public Administration".[10] The incident immediately invited the attention of
Microsoft Inc, Peru, whose General Manager wrote a letter to Dr Edgar David
Villanueva. Dr Villanueva's response received worldwide attention and is still
seen as a classical piece of argumentation favouring use of Free Software in
Governments.[11]

In the USA, there have been efforts to pass legislation at the state level
encouraging use of free software by state government agencies.[12]

## [edit] Internal conflict

Like many social movements, the free software movement has ongoing internal
conflict between personalities and between supporters of compromise versus
strict adherence to values.

### [edit] Open source

In 1998, some companies met to create a marketing campaign for free software
which would focus on technology rather than ethics[citation needed]. After
this Eric Raymond and Bruce Perens, founded Open Source Initiative OSI, which
promotes the term "open-source software" as an alternative term for free
software. OSI does not agree with the free software movement's position that
non-free software is a social problem or that it is unethical.[13]

OSI advocates free software (under the name "open-source software") on the
basis that it is a superior model for software development rather than it
being a social or ethical issue.[14]

Some free software advocates use the term Free and Open Source Software (FOSS)
as an inclusive compromise, drawing on both philosophies to bring both free
software advocates and open source software advocates together to work on
projects with more cohesion. Some users believe that a compromise term
encompassing both aspects is ideal, to promote both the user's freedom with
the software and also to promote the perceived superiority of an open source
development model.

### [edit] Stallman and Torvalds

The two most prominent people attached to the movement, Richard Stallman and
Linus Torvalds, have deep philosophical differences. This has fueled many
dramatic news articles, but has not prevented Stallman from using Torvalds'
kernel or Torvalds from using Stallman's GNU General Public License and the
GNU operating system.

## [edit] Measures of progress

Ohloh, a web service founded in 2004 and launched in 2006, monitors the
development activity in the free software community, providing detailed
metrics and quantitative analyses on the growth and popularity of projects and
programming languages.

## [edit] Criticism and controversy

### [edit] Is something impeding progress?

Some, such as Eric Raymond, criticise the speed at which the free software
movement is progressing, suggesting that temporary compromises should be made
for long-term gains. Raymond argues that this could raise awareness of the
software and thus increase the free software movement's influence on relevant
standards and legislation.[15]

Others, such as Richard Stallman, see the current level of compromise to be
the bigger worry.[16][17]

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Free software portal  
  * Free Culture Movement
  * Free software community
  * Free Software Foundation
  * GNU Manifesto
  * Linux adoption
  * Open Source Initiative
  * BadVista
  * Defective by Design

## [edit] References

  1. ^ [1] "Announcement of the GNU project"]. http://www.gnu.org/gnu/initial-announcement.html].
  2. ^ "Use Free Software". gnu.org. http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/use-free-software.html.
  3. ^ "Stallman interviewed by Sean Daly". Groklaw. 2006-06-23. http://www.groklaw.net/article.php?story=20060625001523547.
  4. ^ "Why free software?". gnu.org. http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/why-free.html.
  5. ^ "Copyleft: Pragmatic Idealism". gnu.org. http://www.fsf.org/licensing/essays/pragmatic.html.
  6. ^ "Free Software and Free Manuals". gnu.org. http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-doc.html.
  7. ^ [2] "Transcript of Stallman on Free Software"]. FSFE. 2006-03-09. http://fsfeurope.org/documents/rms-fs-2006-03-09.en.html].
  8. ^ "Transcript of Stallman speaking at WSIS". Ciaran O'Riordan. http://fsfe.org/en/fellows/ciaran/ciaran_s_free_software_notes/transcript_of_rms_at_wsis_on_is_free_open_source_software_the_answer#wsis--importance-of-awareness.
  9. ^ "Free software liberates Venezuela". Free Software Magazine nÂ°10. 2006-02-08. http://www.freesoftwaremagazine.com/articles/professional_services_venezuela/.
  10. ^ "An English translation of the Free Software bill proposed in Peru". http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Free_Software_in_Public_Agencies.
  11. ^ "Peruvian Congressman Edgar Villanueva writing to Microsoft about free software.". Archived from the original on 2007-08-29. http://web.archive.org/web/20070829215908/http://www.gnu.org.pe/resmseng.html.
  12. ^ "Open source's new weapon: The law?". http://news.cnet.com/2100-1001-949241.html.
  13. ^ "Free", "Open Source", and Philosophies of Software Ownership
  14. ^ "Open Source misses the point". gnu.org. http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/open-source-misses-the-point.html.
  15. ^ "ESR's "World Domination 201", on the need for more compromise by the free software movement". http://www.catb.org/~esr/writings/world-domination/world-domination-201.html.
  16. ^ "RMS on the progress of the movement and his worry about compromise". http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/use-free-software.html.
  17. ^ "Richard Stallman on "World Domination 201"". http://www.libervis.com/article/richard_stallman_on_world_domination_201. "I cannot agree to that compromise, and my experience teaches me that it won't be temporary. ... What our community needs most is more spine in rejection of non-free software. It has far too much willingness to compromise. ... To "argue" in favor of adding non-free software in GNU/Linux distros is almost superfluous, since that's what nearly all of them have already done."

## [edit] Further reading

  * Johan Soderberg, Hacking Capitalism: The Free and Open Source Software Movement, Routledge, 2007, ISBN 0415955432

## [edit] External links

  * What is Free Software? \- Essay by Karl Fogel.
  * The Free Software Movement and the Future of Freedom, a 2006 lecture by Richard Stallman
  * Free Software Movement intro by FSF
  * The GNU Project Philosophy Directory, containing many defining documents of the free software movement
  * An interview with Stallman, "Free Software as a social movement"
  * Christian Imhorst, Anarchy and Source Code - What does the Free Software Movement have to do with Anarchism?, (licence: GFDL), 2005
  * An anti-DRM campaign \- by Bill Xu and Richard Stallman
  * The Codebreakers - a freely redistributable movie

v â¢ d â¢ e

Free and open source software  
General

Copyleft Â· Events and Awards Â· Free software Â· Free Software Definition Â·
Gratis versus Libre Â· Open source software

<IMG> Free software  
portal  
Notable packages

Apache Â· CUPS Â· Firefox Â· GNOME Â· KDE Â· OpenOffice.org Â· Thunderbird Â·
X Window System  
Operating systems

AROS Â· BSD Â· Darwin Â· FreeDOS Â· GNU Â· Haiku Â· Inferno Â· Linux Â· Mach
Â· MINIX Â· OpenSolaris Â· Plan 9 Â· ReactOS Â· Syllable  
Development

GCC Â· LLVM Â· Java Â· Open64 Â· Perl Â· PHP Â· Python Â· Lua Â· Ruby Â· Tcl
Â· libJIT  
History

GNU Â· Linux Â· Mozilla (Application Suite Â· Firefox Â· Thunderbird)  
Organizations

Apache Software Foundation Â· Blender Foundation Â· Eclipse Foundation Â·
FLOSS Manuals Â· freedesktop.org Â· Free Software Foundation Â· GNOME
Foundation Â· GNU Project Â· Google Code Â· Linux Foundation Â· Mozilla
Foundation Â· Open Source Geospatial Foundation Â· Open Source Initiative Â·
SourceForge Â· Xiph.Org Foundation Â· X.Org Foundation  
Licences

Apache Â· BSD Â· GNU GPL Â· LGPL Â· MIT Â· MPL Â· Permissive Â· Microsoft
Public License Â· Microsoft Reciprocal License Â· FSF approved licenses  
Challenges

Binary blob Â· Digital rights management Â· License proliferation Â· Mozilla
software rebranding Â· Proprietary software Â· SCO-Linux controversies Â·
Security Â· Software patents Â· Tivoization Â· Trusted Computing  
Other topics

Alternative terms Â· Community Â· Linux distribution Â· Forking Â· Movement Â·
Microsoft Open Specification Promise Â· Revolution OS Â· Comparison with
closed source  
List of open source software packages  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_software_movement"

Categories: Copyleft media | Free software culture and documents | Free
Software Foundation | GNU project | Libre | Social movements

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since September 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * à·à·à¶à·à¶½
  * Simple English
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 March 2009, at 11:35 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



