
# Trusted Computing

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2008)  
Trusted Computing (TC) is a technology developed and promoted by the Trusted
Computing Group.[1] The term is taken from the field of trusted systems and
has a specialized meaning. With Trusted Computing, the computer will
consistently behave in specific ways, and those behaviors will be enforced by
hardware and software.[1] Enforcing this Trusted behavior is achieved by
loading the hardware with a unique ID and unique master key and denying even
the owner of a computer knowledge and control of their own master key. Trusted
Computing is extremely controversial as the hardware is not only secured for
the owner, but also secured against the owner as well. Such controversy has
led opponents of trusted computing, such as Richard Stallman, to refer to it
instead as treacherous computing, even to the point where some scholarly
articles have begun to place quotes around "trusted computing".[2][3]

Trusted Computing proponents such as International Data Corporation,[4] the
Enterprise Strategy Group[5] and Endpoint Technologies Associates[6] claim the
technology will make computers safer, less prone to viruses and malware, and
thus more reliable from an end-user perspective. In addition, they also claim
that Trusted Computing will allow computers and servers to offer improved
computer security over that which is currently available. Opponents often
claim this technology will be used primarily to enforce digital rights
management policies and not to increase computer security.[7]

Chip manufacturers Intel and AMD, hardware manufacturers such as Dell, and
operating system providers such as Microsoft all plan to include Trusted
Computing into coming generations of products.[8][9]a[âº] The U.S. Army
requires that every new small PC it purchases must come with a Trusted
Platform Module (TPM).[10][11] As of July 3, 2007, so does virtually the
entire Department of Defense.[12] According to the International Data
Corporation, by 2010 essentially all portable PCs and the vast majority of
desktops will include a TPM chip.[13]

## Contents

  * 1 Key concepts
    * 1.1 Endorsement key
    * 1.2 Secure I/O
    * 1.3 Memory curtaining
    * 1.4 Sealed storage
    * 1.5 Remote attestation
  * 2 Known applications of Trusted Computing
    * 2.1 Protecting hard-drive data
  * 3 Possible applications of Trusted Computing
    * 3.1 Digital rights management
    * 3.2 Identity theft protection
    * 3.3 Preventing cheating in online games
    * 3.4 Protection from viruses and spyware
    * 3.5 Protection of biometric authentication data
    * 3.6 Verification of remote computation for grid computing
  * 4 Criticism of Trusted Computing
    * 4.1 Digital rights management
    * 4.2 Users unable to modify software
    * 4.3 Users have no control over data
    * 4.4 Users unable to override
    * 4.5 Loss of anonymity
    * 4.6 Practicality
    * 4.7 Interoperability
    * 4.8 Shutting out of competing products
    * 4.9 Trust
  * 5 Hardware and software support
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links
    * 8.1 Official sites
    * 8.2 Software utilizing Trusted Computing
    * 8.3 Sites criticizing Trusted Computing

  
## [edit] Key concepts

Trusted computing encompasses five key technology concepts, of which all are
required for a fully Trusted system, that is, a system compliant to the TCG
specifications:

  1. Endorsement key
  2. Secure input and output
  3. Memory curtaining / protected execution
  4. Sealed storage
  5. Remote attestation

### [edit] Endorsement key

    The endorsement key is a 2048-bit RSA public and private key pair, which is created randomly on the chip at manufacture time and cannot be changed. The private key never leaves the chip, while the public key is used for attestation and for encryption of sensitive data sent to the chip, as occurs during the TPM_TakeOwnership command. â David Safford[14]
This key is used to allow the executions of secure transactions: every Trusted
Platform Module (TPM) is required to sign a random number, using a particular
protocol created by the trusted computing group (the direct anonymous
attestation protocol) in order to ensure its compliance of the TCG standard
and to prove its identity; this makes it impossible for a software TPM
emulator, with a self-generated Endorsement Key, to start a secure transaction
with a trusted entity. The TPM should be designed to make the extraction of
this key by hardware analysis hard, but tamper-resistance is not a strong
requirement.

### [edit] Secure I/O

Secure input and output (I/O) refers to a protected path between the computer
user and the software with which they believe they are interacting. On current
computer systems there are many ways for malicious software to intercept data
as it travels between a user and a software process â for example keyboard
loggers and screen-scrapers. Secure I/O reflects a hardware and software
protected and verified channel, using checksums stored in the Trusted Platform
Module to verify that the software drivers used to do the I/O has not been
tampered with. Malicious software injecting itself in this path could be
identified. Secure I/O is traditionally known as a Trusted path.

### [edit] Memory curtaining

Memory curtaining extends common memory protection techniques to provide full
isolation of sensitive areas of memory â for example, locations containing
cryptographic keys. Even the operating system does not have full access to
curtained memory, so the information would be secure from an intruder who took
control of the OS, because of the use of separate protected execution
environments. The exact implementation details are vendor specific; Intel's
Trusted Execution Technology already offers this feature.

### [edit] Sealed storage

Sealed storage protects private information by binding it to platform
configuration information including the software and hardware being used. This
means the data can be read only by the same combination of software and
hardware. For example, users who keep a song on their computer that has not
been licensed to be listened will not be able to play it. Currently, a user
can locate the song, listen to it, and send it to someone else, play it in the
software of their choice, or back it up (and in some cases, use circumvention
software to decrypt it). Alternately the user may use software to modify the
operating system's DRM routines to have it leak the song data once, say, a
temporary license was acquired. Using sealed storage, the song is securely
encrypted using a key bound to the trusted platform module so that only the
unmodified and untampered music player on his or her computer can play it.

### [edit] Remote attestation

Remote attestation allows changes to the user's computer to be detected by
authorized parties. For examples, software companies can avoid users tampering
with their software to circumvent technological protection measures. It works
by having the hardware generate a certificate stating what software is
currently running. The computer can then present this certificate to a remote
party to show that its software has not been tampered with.

Remote attestation is usually combined with public-key encryption so that the
information sent can only be read by the programs that presented and requested
the attestation, and not by an eavesdropper, such as the computer owner.

To take the song example again, the user's music player software could send
the song to other machines, but only if they could attest that they were
running a secure copy of the music player software. Combined with the other
technologies, this provides a more secured path for the music: secure I/O
prevents the user from recording it as it is heard on the speakers, memory
curtaining prevents it from being dumped to regular disk files as it is being
worked on, sealed storage curtails unauthorized access to it when saved to the
hard drive, and remote attestation protects it from unauthorized software even
when it is used on other computers. Remote Attestation use, however, has been
discouraged in favour of Direct anonymous attestation.

## [edit] Known applications of Trusted Computing

### [edit] Protecting hard-drive data

Windows Vista Ultimate and Enterprise make use of a Trusted Platform Module to
facilitate BitLocker Drive Encryption.[15]

## [edit] Possible applications of Trusted Computing

### [edit] Digital rights management

Trusted Computing would allow companies to create a Digital rights management
system which would be very hard to circumvent, though not impossible. An
example is downloading a music file. Remote attestation could be used so that
the music file would refuse to play except on a specific music player that
enforces the record company's rules. Sealed storage would prevent the user
from opening the file with another player or another computer. The music would
be played in curtained memory, which would prevent the user from making an
unrestricted copy of the file while it is playing, and secure I/O would
prevent capturing what is being sent to the sound system. Circumventing such a
system would require either manipulation of the computer's hardware, capturing
the analogue (and possibly degraded) signal using a recording device or a
microphone, or breaking the encryption algorithm.

### [edit] Identity theft protection

Trusted Computing could be used to help prevent identity theft. Taking online
banking as an example, remote attestation could be used when the user is
connecting to the bank's server and would only serve the page if the server
could produce the correct certificates. Then the user can send his encrypted
account number and PIN, with some assurance that the information is private to
him and the bank.

### [edit] Preventing cheating in online games

Trusted computing could be used to combat cheating in online games. Some
players modify their game copy in order to gain unfair advantages in the game;
remote attestation, secure I/O and memory curtaining could be used to verify
that all players connected to a server were running an unmodified copy of the
software.

This is especially true with game modifications designed to enhance player
ability or automate certain task. For example, a user might want to install an
auto aiming bot in shooter games, or a harvesting bot in a strategy game.
Since there is no way for the game server to remotely determine if the
commands are given by a human being or a program, the proposed solution is to
certify the code the player's computer is running.

### [edit] Protection from viruses and spyware

Digital signature of software will allow users to identify applications
modified by third parties that could add spyware to the software. For example,
a website offers a modified version of a popular instant messenger that
contains spyware as a drive-by download. The operating system could notice the
lack of a valid signature for these versions and inform the user that the
program has been modified, although this leaves open the question of who
determines if a signature is valid.

Trusted computing might allow increased protection from viruses. However,
Microsoft has denied that this functionality will be present in its NGSCB
architecture. A possible improvement in virus protection would be to allow
antivirus vendors to write software that could not be corrupted by virus
attacks. However, as with most advanced uses of Trusted Computing technology,
preventing software corruption necessitates a Trusted Operating System, such
as Trusted Gentoo In practice any operating system which aims to be backwards
compatible with existing software will not be able to protect against viruses
in this way.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Biometrics ATM in South Korea

### [edit] Protection of biometric authentication data

Biometric devices used for authentication could use trusted computing
technologies (memory curtaining, secure I/O) to assure the user that no
spyware installed on his/her PC is able to steal sensitive biometric data. The
theft of this data could be extremely harmful to the user because while a user
can change a password if he or she knows that the password is no longer
secure, a user cannot change the data generated by a biometric device.

### [edit] Verification of remote computation for grid computing

Trusted computing could be used to guarantee participants in a grid computing
system are returning the results of the computations they claim to be instead
of forging them. This would allow large scale simulations to be run (say a
climate simulation) without expensive redundant computations to guarantee
malicious hosts are not undermining the results to achieve the conclusion they
want.[16]

## [edit] Criticism of Trusted Computing

Trusted Computing opponents such as the Electronic Frontier Foundation and
Free Software Foundation claim trust in the underlying companies is not
deserved and that the technology puts too much power and control into the
hands of those who design systems and software. They also believe that it may
cause consumers to lose anonymity in their online interactions, as well as
mandating technologies Trusted Computing opponents deem unnecessary. They
suggest Trusted Computing as a possible enabler for future versions of
mandatory access control, copy protection, and digital rights management.

Some security experts[17][18] have spoken out against Trusted Computing,
believing it will provide computer manufacturers and software authors with
increased control to impose restrictions on what users are able to do with
their computers. There are concerns that Trusted Computing would have an anti-
competitive effect on competition in the IT market.

There is concern amongst critics that it will not always be possible to
examine the hardware components on which Trusted Computing relies, the Trusted
Platform Module, which is the ultimate hardware system where the core 'root'
of trust in the platform has to lie. If not implemented correctly, it presents
a security risk to overall platform integrity and protected data. The
specifications, as published by the Trusted Computing Group, are open and are
available for anyone to review. However, the final implementations by
commercial vendors will not necessarily be subjected to the same review
process. In addition, the world of cryptography can often move quickly, and
that hardware implementations of algorithms might create an inadvertent
obsolescence. Trusting networked computers to controlling authorities rather
than to individuals may create digital imprimaturs.

The Cambridge cryptographer Ross Anderson has great concerns that "TC can
support remote censorship [...] In general, digital objects created using TC
systems remain under the control of their creators, rather than under the
control of the person who owns the machine on which they happen to be stored
(as at present) [...] So someone who writes a paper that a court decides is
defamatory can be compelled to censor it â and the software company that
wrote the word processor could be ordered to do the deletion if she refuses.
Given such possibilities, we can expect TC to be used to suppress everything
from pornography to writings that criticize political leaders."[19] He goes on
to state that:

    [...] software suppliers can make it much harder for you to switch to their competitors' products. At a simple level, Word could encrypt all your documents using keys that only Microsoft products have access to; this would mean that you could only read them using Microsoft products, not with any competing word processor. [...]
    The [...] most important benefit for Microsoft is that TC will dramatically increase the costs of switching away from Microsoft products (such as Office) to rival products (such as OpenOffice). For example, a law firm that wants to change from Office to OpenOffice right now merely has to install the software, train the staff and convert their existing files. In five years' time, once they have received TC-protected documents from perhaps a thousand different clients, they would have to get permission (in the form of signed digital certificates) from each of these clients in order to migrate their files to a new platform. The law firm won't in practice want to do this, so they will be much more tightly locked in, which will enable Microsoft to hike its prices.[19]
Anderson summarizes the case by saying "The fundamental issue is that whoever
controls the TC infrastructure will acquire a huge amount of power. Having
this single point of control is like making everyone use the same bank, or the
same accountant, or the same lawyer. There are many ways in which this power
could be abused."[19]

### [edit] Digital rights management

One of the early motivations behind trusted computing was a desire by media
and software corporations for stricter digital rights management technology to
prevent users from freely sharing and using potentially copyrighted or private
files without explicit permission. Microsoft has announced a DRM technology,
PVP-OPM, that says it will make use of hardware encryption.

An example could be downloading a music file from a band: the band's record
company could come up with rules for how the band's music can be used. For
example, they might want the user to play the file only three times a day
without paying additional money. Also, they could use remote attestation to
only send their music to a music player that enforces their rules: sealed
storage would prevent the user from opening the file with another player that
did not enforce the restrictions. Memory curtaining would prevent the user
from making an unrestricted copy of the file while it is playing, and secure
output would prevent capturing what is sent to the sound system.

Once digital recordings are converted to analog signals, the (possibly
degraded) signals could be recorded by conventional means, such as by
connecting an audio recorder to the card instead of speakers, or by recording
the speaker sounds with a microphone. Trusted computing cannot guard
noninteractive works from analog reconversion.

### [edit] Users unable to modify software

A user who wanted to switch to a competing program might find that it would be
impossible for that new program to read old data, as the information would be
"locked in" to the old program. It could also make it impossible for the user
to read or modify their data except as specifically permitted by the software.

Remote attestation could cause other problems. Currently web sites can be
visited using a number of web browsers, though certain websites may be
formatted such that some browsers cannot decipher their code. Some browsers
have found a way to get around that problem by emulating other browsers. With
remote attestation a website could check the internet browser being used and
refuse to display on any browser other than the specified one (like Internet
Explorer), so even emulating the browser would not work.

### [edit] Users have no control over data

Sealed storage could prevent users from moving sealed files to the new
computer. This limitation might exist either through poor software design or
deliberate limitations placed by publishers of works. The migration section of
the TPM specification requires that it be impossible to move certain kinds of
files except to a computer with the identical make and model of security chip.

### [edit] Users unable to override

Some opponents of Trusted Computing advocate allowing owner overrides to allow
the computer to use the secure I/O path to make sure the owner is physically
present, to then bypass restrictions. Such an override would allow remote
attestation to a user's specification, e.g., to create certificates that say
Internet Explorer is running, even if a different browser is used. Instead of
preventing software change, remote attestation would indicate when the
software has been changed without owner's permission.

Trusted Computing Group members have refused to implement owner override.[20]
Proponents of trusted computing believe that Owner override defeats the trust
in other computers since remote attestation can be forged by the owner. Owner
override offers the security and enforcement benefits to a machine owner, but
does not allow him to trust other computers, because their owners could waive
rules or restrictions on their own computers. Under this scenario, once data
is sent to someone else's computer, whether it be a diary, a DRM music file,
or a joint project, that other person controls what security, if any, their
computer will enforce on their copy of those data. This has the potential to
undermine the applications of trusted computing to enforce Digital Rights
Management, control cheating in online games and attest to remote computations
for grid computing.

### [edit] Loss of anonymity

Because a Trusted Computing equipped computer is able to uniquely attest to
its own identity, it will be possible for vendors and others who possess the
ability to use the attestation feature to zero in on the identity of the user
of TC-enabled software with a high degree of certainty.

Such a capability is contingent on the reasonable chance that the user at some
time provides user-identifying information, whether voluntarily or indirectly.
One common way that information can be obtained and linked is when a user
registers a computer just after purchase. Another common way is when a user
provides identifying information to the website of an affiliate of the vendor.

While proponents of TC point out that online purchases and credit transactions
could potentially be more secure as a result of the remote attestation
capability, this may cause the computer user to lose expectations of anonymity
when using the Internet.

Critics point out that this could have a chilling effect on political free
speech, the ability of journalists to use anonymous sources, whistle blowing,
political blogging and other areas where the public needs protection from
retaliation through anonymity.

In response to privacy concerns, researchers developed direct anonymous
attestation (DAA) which allows a client to perform attestation while limiting
the amount of identifying information that is provided to the verifier. DAA
also supports an anonymity revocation system[21] wherein a third party has the
information necessary to uniquely identify the TPM associated with a
particular attestation.

### [edit] Practicality

Any hardware component, including the TC hardware itself, has the potential to
fail, or be upgraded and replaced. A user might rightly conclude that the mere
possibility of being irrevocably cut-off from access to his or her own
information, or to years' worth of expensive work-products, with no
opportunity for recovery of that information, is unacceptable.[22] The concept
of basing ownership or usage restrictions upon the verifiable identity of a
particular piece of computing hardware may be perceived by the user as
problematic if the equipment in question malfunctions.

### [edit] Interoperability

Trusted Computing requests that all software and hardware vendors will follow
the technical specifications released by the Trusted Computing Group in order
to allow interoperability between different trusted software stacks. However,
even now there are interoperability problems between the TrouSerS trusted
software stack (released as open source software by IBM) and Hewlett-Packard's
stack.[23] Another problem is the fact that the technical specifications are
still changing, so it is unclear which is the standard implementation of the
trusted stack.

### [edit] Shutting out of competing products

People have voiced concerns that trusted computing could be used to keep or
discourage users from running software created by companies outside of a small
industry group. Microsoft has received a great deal of bad press surrounding
their Palladium software architecture, evoking comments such as "Few pieces of
vaporware have evoked a higher level of fear and uncertainty than Microsoft's
Palladium", "Palladium is a plot to take over cyberspace", and "Palladium will
keep us from running any software not personally approved by Bill Gates".[24]
The concerns about trusted computing being used to shut out competition exist
within a broader framework of consumers being concerned about using bundling
of products to obscure prices of products and to engage in anti-competitive
practices.[2] Trusted computing is seen as harmful or problematic to small and
open source software developers.[25]

### [edit] Trust

In the widely used public-key cryptography, creation of keys can be done on
the local computer and the creator has complete control over who has access to
it.[26] In some proposed encryption-decryption chips, a private/public key is
permanently embedded into the hardware when it is manufactured,[27] and
hardware manufactures would have the opportunity to record the key without
leaving evidence of doing so. With this key it would be possible to have
access to data encrypted with it, and to authenticate as it.[28] It would be
fairly trivial for manufactures to give a copy of this key to the government
or the software manufactures, as the platform must go through steps so that it
works with authenticated software.[citation needed] In order to trust anything
that is authenticated by or encrypted by a TPM or a Trusted computer,
therefore, one has to trust the company that made that chip, the company that
designed the chip, those companies allowed to make software for the chip, and
the ability and interest of those companies to not compromise the
process.[citation needed]

It is also critical that one be able to trust that the hardware manufacturers
and software developers properly implement trusted computing standards.
Incorrect implementation could be hidden from users, and thus could undermine
the integrity of the whole system without users being aware of the flaw.[29]

## [edit] Hardware and software support

  * Since 2004, most major manufacturers have shipped systems that have included Trusted Platform Modules, with associated BIOS support.[30] In accordance with the TCG specifications, the user must enable the Trusted Platform Module before it can be used.
  * The Linux kernel has included trusted computing support since version 2.6.13, and there are several projects to implement trusted computing for Linux. In January 2005, members of Gentoo Linux's "crypto herd" announced their intention of providing support for TC â in particular support for the Trusted Platform Module.[31] There is also a TCG-compliant software stack for Linux named TrouSerS, released under an open source license.
  * Some limited form of trusted computing can be implemented on current versions of Microsoft Windows with third party software.
  * The Intel Classmate PC (a competitor to the One Laptop Per Child) includes a Trusted Platform Module[32]

## [edit] See also

  * Trusted Platform Module
  * Next-Generation Secure Computing Base (formerly known as Palladium)
  * Glossary of legal terms in technology

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Chris Mitchell, Trusted Computing, Institution of Electrical Engineers, 2005.
  2. ^ a b Ross Anderson, "Cryptography and Competition Policy - Issues with âTrusted Computingâ ", in Economics of Information Security, from series Advances in Information Security, Vol. 12, April 11, 2006.
  3. ^ F. Stajano, "Security for whom? The shifting security assumptions of pervasive computing", Lecture notes in computer science, vol. 2609, pp. 16-27, 2003.
  4. ^ Rau, Shane (February 2006). "The Trusted Computing Platform Emerges as Industry's First Comprehensive Approach to IT Security" (PDF). IDC Executive Brief. International Data Corporation. https://www.trustedcomputinggroup.org/news/Industry_Data/IDC_448_Web.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-02-07.
  5. ^ Oltsik, Jon (January 2006). "Trusted Enterprise Security: How the Trusted Computing Group (TCG) Will Advance Enterprise Security" (PDF). White Paper. Enterprise Strategy Group. https://www.trustedcomputinggroup.org/news/Industry_Data/ESG_White_Paper.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-02-07.
  6. ^ Kay, Roger L. (2006). "How to Implement Trusted Computing: A Guide to Tighter Enterprise Security" (PDF). Endpoint Technologies Associates. https://www.trustedcomputinggroup.org/news/Industry_Data/Implementing_Trusted_Computing_RK.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-02-07.
  7. ^ Richard Stallman. "Can You Trust Your Computer?".
  8. ^ "Enhancing IT Security with Trusted Computing Group standards" (PDF). Dell Power Solutions. November 2006. 14. http://www.dell.com/downloads/global/power/ps4q06-20070160-tcg.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-02-07. "TPMs [Trusted Platform Modules] from various semiconductor vendors are included on enterprise desktop and notebook systems from Dell and other vendors"
  9. ^ "Trusted Platform Module Services in Windows Vista". Windows Hardware Development Central. Microsoft. 2005-04-25. http://www.microsoft.com/whdc/system/platform/pcdesign/TPM_secure.mspx. Retrieved on 2007-02-07. "Windows Vista provides a set of services for applications that use TPM technologies."
  10. ^ Lemos, Robert (2006-07-28). "U.S. Army requires trusted computing". Security Focus. http://www.securityfocus.com/brief/265. Retrieved on 2007-02-07.
  11. ^ "Army CIO/G-6 500-day plan" (PDF). U.S. Army. October 2006. http://www.army.mil/ciog6/news/500Day2006Update.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-02-07. "Strategic goal n. 3 , 'deliver a joint netcentric information that enables warfighter decision superiority'"
  12. ^ encryption of unclassified data
  13. ^ Evers, Joris (2005-08-29). "Microsoft's leaner approach to Vista security". CNET News. http://m.news.com/Microsofts+leaner+approach+to+Vista+security/2163-7355_3-5843808.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-07.
  14. ^ Safford, David (2006-10-27). "Take Control of TCPA". Linux Journal. http://www.linuxjournal.com/article/6633. Retrieved on 2007-02-07.
  15. ^ Ferguson, Niels (August 2006). "AES-CBC + Elephant: A Disk Encryption Algorithm for Windows Vista" (PDF). Microsoft TechNet. http://download.microsoft.com/download/0/2/3/0238acaf-d3bf-4a6d-b3d6-0a0be4bbb36e/BitLockerCipher200608.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-02-07.
  16. ^ Mao, Wenbo Jin, Hai and Martin, Andrew (2005-06-07). "Innovations for Grid Security From Trusted Computing" (PDF). http://www.hpl.hp.com/personal/Wenbo_Mao/research/tcgridsec.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-02-07.
  17. ^ Marson, Ingrid (2006-01-27). "Trusted Computing comes under attack". ZDNet. http://news.zdnet.co.uk/internet/security/0,39020375,39249368,00.htm. Retrieved on 2007-02-07.
  18. ^ Schneier, Bruce (2002-08-15). "Palladium and the TCPA". Crypto-Gram Newsletter. http://www.schneier.com/crypto-gram-0208.html#1. Retrieved on 2007-02-07.
  19. ^ a b c Anderson, Ross (August 2003). [http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~rja14/tcpa-faq.html "`Trusted Computing' Frequently Asked Questions: TC / TCG / LaGrande / NGSCB / Longhorn / Palladium / TCPA Version 1.1"]. http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~rja14/tcpa-faq.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-07.
  20. ^ Schoen, Seth (2003-12-01). "Give TCPA an Owner Override". Linux Journal. http://www.linuxjournal.com/article/7055. Retrieved on 2007-02-07.
  21. ^ https://www.trustedcomputinggroup.org/faq/TSS_1.2_FAQ/
  22. ^ Trousers FAQ
  23. ^ "1.7 - I've taken ownership of my TPM under another OS...". TrouSerS FAQ. http://trousers.sourceforge.net/faq.html#1.7. Retrieved on 2007-02-07.
  24. ^ E.W. Felten, "Understanding trusted computing: will its benefits outweigh its drawbacks?", Security & Privacy, IEEE, Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 60-62,
  25. ^ R. Oppliger, R. Rytz, "Does trusted computing remedy computer security problems?", Security & Privacy, IEEE, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 16-19, 2005.
  26. ^ "IEEE P1363: Standard Specifications For Public-Key Cryptography", Retrieved March 9, 2009.
  27. ^ Tal Garfinkel, Ben Pfaff, Jim Chow, Mendel Rosenblum, Dan Boneh, "Terra: a virtual machine-based platform for trusted computing", ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review, Vol. 37, No. 5, pp. 193-206, 2003.
  28. ^ These are the functions of the private key in the RSA algorithm
  29. ^ Seth Schoen, "Trusted Computing: Promise and Risk", COSPA Knowledge Base: Comparison, selection, & suitability of OSS, April 11th, 2006.
  30. ^ Tony McFadden (March 26, 2006). "TPM Matrix". http://www.tonymcfadden.net/tpmvendors_arc.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-05.
  31. ^ "Trusted Gentoo". Gentoo Weekly Newsletter. January 31, 2005. http://lwn.net/Articles/121386/. Retrieved on 2006-05-05.
  32. ^ Intel (December 6, 2006). "Product Brief: Classmate PC". http://download.intel.com/intel/worldahead/pdf/classmatepc_productbrief.pdf?iid=worldahead+ac_cmpc_pdf. Retrieved on 2007-01-13.

## [edit] External links

### [edit] Official sites

  * Trusted Computing Group (TCG) â Trusted computing standards body, previously known as the TCPA
  * Trusted Mobile Platform â a set of specifications that define security features for mobile devices, jointly developed by IBM, Intel, and NTT DoCoMo
  * TCG products page :information on TCG Member's TCG-related products and services

### [edit] Software utilizing Trusted Computing

  * openTC â Public research and development project (esp. trusted operating systems) funded by the European Union to create open source trusted and secure computing systems.
  * EMSCB â European Multilaterally Secure Computing Base, Public research and development project for trusted computing applications on open source software.
  * Forum for Open SW based on TC â TPM drivers and support forum for LINUX etc.
  * Enforcer â Linux module that use Trusted Computing to ensure no tampering of the file system.
  * Next-Generation Secure Computing Base (NGSCB) â Microsoft's trusted computing architecture (codename Palladium)
  * TrouSerS â The open-source TCG Software Stack with FAQ explaining possible problems using a TPM
  * Trusted Java â API Java for TrouSerS
  * TPM Emulator â Software-based TPM emulator

### [edit] Sites criticizing Trusted Computing

  * Trusted Computing: An Animated Short Story â by Benjamin Stephan and Lutz Vogel
  * Can You Trust Your Computer? â by Richard Stallman
  * Who Owns Your Computer? â by Bruce Schneier
  * DRM.info â What you should know about Digital Restrictions Management (and âTechnological Protection Measuresâ (TPM))

v â¢ d â¢ e

Free and open source software  
General

Copyleft Â· Events and Awards Â· Free software Â· Free Software Definition Â·
Gratis versus Libre Â· Open source software

<IMG> Free software  
portal  
Notable packages

Apache Â· CUPS Â· Firefox Â· GNOME Â· KDE Â· OpenOffice.org Â· Thunderbird Â·
X Window System  
Operating systems

AROS Â· BSD Â· Darwin Â· FreeDOS Â· GNU Â· Haiku Â· Inferno Â· Linux Â· Mach
Â· MINIX Â· OpenSolaris Â· Plan 9 Â· ReactOS Â· Syllable  
Development

GCC Â· LLVM Â· Java Â· Open64 Â· Perl Â· PHP Â· Python Â· Lua Â· Ruby Â· Tcl
Â· libJIT  
History

GNU Â· Linux Â· Mozilla (Application Suite Â· Firefox Â· Thunderbird)  
Organizations

Apache Software Foundation Â· Blender Foundation Â· Eclipse Foundation Â·
FLOSS Manuals Â· freedesktop.org Â· Free Software Foundation Â· GNOME
Foundation Â· GNU Project Â· Google Code Â· Linux Foundation Â· Mozilla
Foundation Â· Open Source Geospatial Foundation Â· Open Source Initiative Â·
SourceForge Â· Xiph.Org Foundation Â· X.Org Foundation  
Licences

Apache Â· BSD Â· GNU GPL Â· LGPL Â· MIT Â· MPL Â· Permissive Â· Microsoft
Public License Â· Microsoft Reciprocal License Â· FSF approved licenses  
Challenges

Binary blob Â· Digital rights management Â· License proliferation Â· Mozilla
software rebranding Â· Proprietary software Â· SCO-Linux controversies Â·
Security Â· Software patents Â· Tivoization Â· Trusted Computing  
Other topics

Alternative terms Â· Community Â· Linux distribution Â· Forking Â· Movement Â·
Microsoft Open Specification Promise Â· Revolution OS Â· Comparison with
closed source  
List of open source software packages  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_Computing"

Categories: Cryptography | Business law | Copyright law | Trusted computing

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2008 | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since
March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Svenska
  * VÃ¨neto
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 11:03.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



