
# Object Management Group

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Object Management Group (OMG) is a consortium, originally aimed at setting
standards for distributed object-oriented systems, and is now focused on
modeling (programs, systems and business processes) and model-based standards.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 History
  * 3 OMG products
    * 3.1 Common Object Request Broker Architecture
    * 3.2 Data Distribution Service
    * 3.3 Model Driven Architecture
    * 3.4 Architecture Driven Modernization
    * 3.5 Domain models
    * 3.6 Software assurance and regulatory compliance
    * 3.7 Certification
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Overview

OMG provide only specifications, and does not provide implementations. But
before a specification can be accepted as a standard by OMG, the members of
the winning submitter team must guarantee that they will bring a conforming
product to market within a year. This is an attempt to prevent unimplemented
(and unimplementable) standards.

Other private companies or open source groups are encouraged to produce
conforming products and OMG is attempting to develop mechanisms to enforcing
true interoperability.

## [edit] History

Founded in 1989 by eleven companies (including Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Sun
Microsystems, Apple Computer, American Airlines and Data General), OMG tried
to create a heterogeneous distributed object standard.

The goal was a common portable and interoperable object model with methods and
data that work using all types of development environments on all types of
platforms.

Today, over 800 companies from both the computer industry and software-using
companies from other industries are members of OMG. Since 2000 the OMG's
International Headquarters are located in Needham, Massachusetts.

As of June 2006 the latest version of UML is 2.1, MOF is 2.0 and XMI is 2.1.

In 2006 the BPMN language specification was adopted as a standard by OMG.

In 2007 the Business Motivation Model (BMM) was adopted as a standard by the
OMG. The BMM is a metamodel that provides a vocabulary for corporate
governance and strategic planning and is particularly relevant to businesses
undertaking governance, regulatory compliance, business transformation and
strategic planning activities.

## [edit] OMG products

### [edit] Common Object Request Broker Architecture

At its founding, OMG set out to create the initial Common Object Request
Broker Architecture (CORBA) standard which appeared in 1991. As of 31 March
2003, the latest standard is CORBA 3.0. OMG has also developed a core set of
standards adapting CORBA for embedded and real-time systems. Implementations
of real time CORBA are widely used in control systems in ships and aircraft.

### [edit] Data Distribution Service

Data Distribution Service for real-time systems (DDS) is a specification of a
publish/subscribe middleware for distributed systems created in response to
the need to augment CORBA with a data-centric publish-subscribe specification.
[1]

### [edit] Model Driven Architecture

OMG evolved towards modeling standards by creating the standard for Unified
Modeling Language (UML) followed by related standards for

  * Meta-Object Facility (MOF),
  * XML Metadata Interchange (XMI) and
  * MOF Query/Views/Transformation (QVT).

These together provide the foundation for Model Driven Architecture (MDA), and
related set of standards, building upon the success of UML and MOF.

Systems Modeling Language (SysML), a modeling language based on UML for use in
Systems Engineering, has been standardized in collaboration with INCOSE.

Significant progress has also been made in bringing the world of UML modeling
and the Semantic Web together through the adoption of the Ontology Definition
Metamodel which relates UML models in a standard way with RDF and Web Ontology
Language (OWL) models.

Semantics of Business Vocabulary and Business Rules (SBVR) is a landmark for
the OMG, the first OMG specification to incorporate the formal use of natural
language in modeling and the first to provide explicitly a model of formal
logic. Based on a fusion of linguistics, logic, and computer science, and two
years in preparation, SBVR provides a way to capture specifications in natural
language and represent them in formal logic so they can be machine-processed.
SBVR is an integral part of MDA.

### [edit] Architecture Driven Modernization

Architecture Driven Modernization (ADM} is the reverse of MDA. It also means
Architecture Driven Modernization. ADMTF is an OMG group similar to ADTF with
high potential.

Knowledge Discovery Metamodel (KDM), a common intermediate representation for
existing software systems and their operating environments. Knowledge
Discovery Metamodel is designed as the OMG's foundation for software
modernization and software assurance. Knowledge Discovery Metamodel uses Meta-
Object Facility to define an XMI interchange format between tools that work
with existing software and an abstract interface for the next-generation
assurance and modernization tools.

Abstract Syntax Tree Metamodel (ASTM), a modeling language for fine grained
reverse engineering.

Semantics of Business Vocabulary and Business Rules (SBVR) and KDM are
designed as two parts of a unique OMG Technology Stack for software analytics
related to existing software systems. KDM defines an ontology related to
software artifacts and thus provides an initial formalization of the
information related to a software system. SBVR is further used to formalize
complex compliance rules related to the software.

### [edit] Domain models

  * Business models : OMG manages a number of standards for business modeling, including BPMN, the Business Motivation Model (BMM) and the Semantics of Business Vocabulary and Business Rules (SBVR) specification.

  * Verticals : Considerable progress has also been made in developing vertical model-based standards in the healthcare, finance, telecommunications, manufacturing, software-defined radio, space/ground systems communications and some dozen other technology areas.

### [edit] Software assurance and regulatory compliance

New activities have been initiated to address important concerns of Regulatory
Compliance and Software Assurance, building upon the base standards of MDA.

### [edit] Certification

OMG offers three professional certifications:

  * OCRES - OMG Certified Real-time and Embedded Systems Specialist[2]
  * OCUP - OMG Certified UML Professional[3]
  * OCEB - OMG Certified Expert in Business Process Management (BPM)[4]

## [edit] References

The original version of this page was based on Object+Management+Group at the
Free On-line Dictionary of Computing (FOLDOC), and is used with permission
under the GFDL.

  1. ^ As of December 2005 the latest standard is DDS 1.2, with version 1.3 currently available to OMG members.
  2. ^ OCRES - OMG Certified Real-time and Embedded Systems Specialist
  3. ^ OCUP - OMG Certified UML Professional
  4. ^ OCEB - OMG Certified Expert in Business Process Management (BPM)

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2009)  
## [edit] External links

  * Object Management Group website
  * Model Driven Architecture website
  * Architecture-Driven Modernization website
  * Software Assurance website
  * UML Certification Program

v â¢ d â¢ e

Unified Modeling Language  
Actors

Organizations: Object Management Group â¢ UML Partners â¢ Persons: Grady
Booch â¢ Ivar Jacobson â¢ James Rumbaugh  
Concepts

Object oriented: Object-oriented programming â¢ Object-oriented analysis and
design

Structure: Actor â¢ Attribute â¢ Artifact â¢ Class â¢ Component â¢
Interface â¢ Object â¢ Package

Behavior: Activity â¢ Event â¢ Message â¢ Method â¢ State â¢ Use case

Relationships: Aggregation â¢ Association â¢ Composition â¢ Dependency â¢
Generalization (or Inheritance)

Extensibility: Profile â¢ Stereotype â¢ Other concepts: Multiplicity  
Structure diagrams

Class diagram â¢ Component diagram â¢ Composite structure diagram â¢
Deployment diagram â¢ Object diagram â¢ Package diagram  
Behavior diagrams

Activity diagram â¢ State Machine diagram â¢ Use case diagram  
Interaction diagrams

Communication diagram â¢ Sequence diagram â¢ Interaction overview diagram
â¢ Timing diagram  
Other topics

Glossary of UML terms â¢ IBM Rational Unified Process â¢ List of UML tools
â¢ Systems Modeling Language â¢ UML colors â¢ XMI  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object_Management_Group"

Categories: Standards organizations | Unified Modeling Language

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating text from FOLDOC |
Articles needing additional references from February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Italiano
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 20 February 2009, at 01:11 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



