
# Berkeley Software Distribution

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"BSD" redirects here. For other uses, see BSD (disambiguation).

BSD Unix Company / developer CSRG, UC Berkeley  
Programmed in C  
OS family Unix-like  
Working state Superseded by derivatives (see below)  
Source model Free Software / Open source  
Initial release 1977  
Latest stable release 4.4-Lite2 / 1995  
Available language(s) English  
Supported platforms PDP-11, VAX, Intel 80386  
Kernel type Monolithic  
Default user interface Command-line interface  
License BSD licenses  
Website N/A  
Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD, sometimes called Berkeley Unix) is the
Unix operating system derivative developed and distributed by the Computer
Systems Research Group of the University of California, Berkeley, from 1977 to
1995.

Historically, BSD has been considered a branch of UNIX â "BSD UNIX", because
it shared the initial codebase and design with the original AT&T UNIX
operating system. In the 1980s, BSD was widely adopted by vendors of
workstation-class systems in the form of proprietary UNIX variants such as DEC
ULTRIX and Sun Microsystems SunOS. This can be attributed to the ease with
which it could be licensed, and the familiarity it found among the founders of
many technology companies of this era.

Though these commercial BSD derivatives were largely superseded by the UNIX
System V Release 4 and OSF/1 systems in the 1990s (both of which incorporated
BSD code), later BSD releases provided a basis for several open source
development projects which continue to this day.

Today, the term of "BSD" is often non-specifically used to refer to any of
these BSD descendants, e.g. FreeBSD, NetBSD or OpenBSD, which together form a
branch of the family of Unix-like operating systems.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 PDP-11 beginnings
    * 1.2 VAX versions
    * 1.3 4.3BSD
    * 1.4 Net/2 and legal troubles
    * 1.5 4.4BSD and descendants
  * 2 Technology
  * 3 Significant BSD descendants
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 Bibliography
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Evolution of Unix systems

### [edit] PDP-11 beginnings

The earliest distributions of Unix from Bell Labs in the 1970s included the
source code to the operating system, allowing researchers at universities to
modify and extend Unix. The first Unix system at Berkeley was a PDP-11
installed in 1974, and the computer science department used it for extensive
research thereafter.

Other universities became interested in the software at Berkeley, and so in
1977 Bill Joy, then a graduate student at Berkeley, assembled and sent out
tapes of the first Berkeley Software Distribution (1BSD). 1BSD was an add-on
to Sixth Edition Unix rather than a complete operating system in its own
right; its main components were a Pascal compiler and Joy's ex line editor.

The Second Berkeley Software Distribution (2BSD), released in 1978, included
updated versions of the 1BSD software as well as two new programs by Joy that
persist on Unix systems to this day: the vi text editor (a visual version of
ex) and the C shell.

Later releases of 2BSD contained ports of changes to the VAX-based releases of
BSD back to the PDP-11 architecture. 2.9BSD from 1983 included code from
4.1cBSD, and was the first release that was a full OS (a modified Version 7
Unix) rather than a set of applications and patches. The most recent release,
2.11BSD, was first released in 1992. As of 2008, maintenance updates from
volunteers are still continuing, with patch 447 being released on December 31,
2008.[1]

### [edit] VAX versions

A VAX computer was installed at Berkeley in 1978, but the port of Unix to the
VAX architecture, UNIX/32V, did not take advantage of the VAX's virtual memory
capabilities. The kernel of 32V was largely rewritten by Berkeley students to
include a virtual memory implementation, and a complete operating system
including the new kernel, ports of the 2BSD utilities to the VAX, and the
utilities from 32V was released as 3BSD at the end of 1979. 3BSD was also
alternatively called Virtual VAX/UNIX or VMUNIX (for Virtual Memory Unix), and
BSD kernel images were normally called `/vmunix` until 4.4BSD.

The success of 3BSD was a major factor in the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency's (DARPA) decision to fund Berkeley's Computer Systems
Research Group (CSRG), which would develop a standard Unix platform for future
DARPA research in the VLSI Project. CSRG released 4BSD, containing numerous
improvements to the 3BSD system, in October 1980.

4BSD (November 1980) offered a number of enhancements over 3BSD, notably job
control in the previously released csh, delivermail (the antecedent of
sendmail), "reliable" signals, and the Curses programming library.

4.1BSD (June 1981) was a response to criticisms of BSD's performance relative
to the dominant VAX operating system, VMS. The 4.1BSD kernel was
systematically tuned up by Bill Joy until it could perform as well as VMS on
several benchmarks. (The release would have been called 5BSD, but the name was
changed to avoid confusion with AT&T's UNIX System V release. One early,
never-released test version was in fact called 4.5BSD.)

4.2BSD would take over two years to implement and contained several major
overhauls. Before its official release came three intermediate versions: 4.1a
incorporated a modified version of BBN's preliminary TCP/IP implementation;
4.1b included the new Berkeley Fast File System, implemented by Marshall Kirk
McKusick; and 4.1c was an interim release during the last few months of
4.2BSD's development.

To guide the design of 4.2BSD Duane Adams of DARPA formed a "steering
committee" consisting of Bob Fabry, Bill Joy and Sam Leffler from UCB, Alan
Nemeth and Rob Gurwitz from BBN, Dennis Ritchie from Bell Labs, Keith Lantz
from Stanford, Rick Rashid from Carnegie-Mellon, Bert Halstead from MIT, Dan
Lynch from ISI, and Gerald J. Popek of UCLA. The committee met from April 1981
to June 1983.

The official 4.2BSD release came in August 1983. It was notable as the first
version released after the 1982 departure of Bill Joy to co-found Sun
Microsystems; Mike Karels and Marshall Kirk McKusick took on leadership roles
within the project from that point forward. On a lighter note, it also marked
the debut of BSD's daemon mascot in a drawing by John Lasseter that appeared
on the cover of the printed manuals distributed by USENIX.

### [edit] 4.3BSD

4.3BSD was released in June 1986. Its main changes were to improve the
performance of many of the new contributions of 4.2BSD that had not been as
heavily tuned as the 4.1BSD code. Prior to the release, BSD's implementation
of TCP/IP had diverged considerably from BBN's official implementation. After
several months of testing, DARPA determined that the 4.2BSD version was
superior and would remain in 4.3BSD. (See also History of the Internet.)

After 4.3BSD, it was determined that BSD would move away from the aging VAX
platform. The Power 6/32 platform (codenamed "Tahoe") developed by Computer
Consoles Inc. seemed promising at the time, but was abandoned by its
developers shortly thereafter. Nonetheless, the 4.3BSD-Tahoe port (June 1988)
proved valuable as it led to a separation of machine-dependent and machine-
independent code in BSD which would improve the system's future portability.

Until this point, all versions of BSD had incorporated proprietary AT&T Unix
code and therefore required licenses from AT&T for their use. Source code
licenses had become very expensive by this point, and several outside parties
had expressed interest in a separate release of the networking code, which had
been developed entirely outside AT&T and would not be subject to the licensing
requirement. This led to Networking Release 1 (Net/1), which was made
available to non-licensees of AT&T code and was freely redistributable under
the terms of the BSD license. It was released in June 1989.

4.3BSD-Reno came in early 1990. It was an interim release during the early
development of 4.4BSD, and its use was considered a "gamble", hence the naming
after the gambling center of Reno, Nevada. This release was clearly moving
towards POSIX compliance, and, according to some, away from the BSD philosophy
(as POSIX is very much based on System V, and Reno was quite bloated compared
to previous releases).

In August 2006, Information Week magazine rated 4.3BSD as the "Greatest
Software Ever Written".[2] They commented: "BSD 4.3 represents the single
biggest theoretical undergirder of the Internet."

### [edit] Net/2 and legal troubles

After Net/1, BSD developer Keith Bostic proposed that more non-AT&T sections
of the BSD system be released under the same license as Net/1. To this end, he
started a project to reimplement most of the standard Unix utilities without
using the AT&T code. For example, vi, which had been based on the original
Unix version of ed, was rewritten as nvi (new vi). Within eighteen months, all
the AT&T utilities had been replaced, and it was determined that only a few
AT&T files remained in the kernel. These files were removed, and the result
was the June 1991 release of Networking Release 2 (Net/2), a nearly complete
operating system that was freely distributable.

Net/2 was the basis for two separate ports of BSD to the Intel 80386
architecture: the free 386BSD by William Jolitz and the proprietary BSD/386
(later renamed BSD/OS) by Berkeley Software Design (BSDi). 386BSD itself was
short-lived, but became the initial code base of the NetBSD and FreeBSD
projects that were started shortly thereafter.

BSDi soon found itself in legal trouble with AT&T's Unix System Laboratories
subsidiary, then the owners of the System V copyright and the Unix trademark.
The USL v. BSDi lawsuit was filed in 1992 and led to an injunction on the
distribution of Net/2 until the validity of USL's copyright claims on the
source could be determined.

The lawsuit slowed development of the free-software descendants of BSD for
nearly two years while their legal status was in question, and as a result
systems based on the Linux kernel, which did not have such legal ambiguity,
gained greater support. Although not released until 1992, development of
386BSD predated that of Linux, and Linus Torvalds has said that if 386BSD had
been available at the time, he would probably not have created Linux.[3]

### [edit] 4.4BSD and descendants

See also: Comparison of BSD operating systems

The lawsuit was settled in January 1994, largely in Berkeley's favor. Of the
18,000 files in the Berkeley distribution, only 3 had to be removed and 70
modified to show USL copyright notices. A further condition of the settlement
was that USL would not file further lawsuits against users and distributors of
the Berkeley-owned code in the upcoming 4.4BSD release.

In June 1994, 4.4BSD was released in two forms: the freely distributable
4.4BSD-Lite contained no AT&T source, whereas 4.4BSD-Encumbered was available,
as earlier releases had been, only to AT&T licensees.

The final release from Berkeley was 1995's 4.4BSD-Lite Release 2, after which
the CSRG was dissolved and development of BSD at Berkeley ceased. Since then,
several variants based directly or indirectly on 4.4BSD-Lite (such as FreeBSD,
NetBSD, OpenBSD and DragonFly BSD) have been maintained.

In addition, the permissive nature of the BSD license has allowed many other
operating systems, both free and proprietary, to incorporate BSD code. For
example, Microsoft Windows has used BSD-derived code in its implementation of
TCP/IP and bundles recompiled versions of BSD's command line networking tools
with its current releases.[4] Also Darwin, the system on which Apple's Mac OS
X is built, is partly derived from 4.4BSD-Lite2 and FreeBSD. Various
commercial UNIXes, such as Solaris, also contain varying amounts of BSD code.

## [edit] Technology

BSD pioneered many of the advances of modern computing. Berkeley's Unix was
the first Unix to include libraries supporting the Internet Protocol stacks:
Berkeley sockets. By integrating sockets with the Unix operating system's file
descriptors, it became almost as easy to read and write data across a network
as it was to access a disk. The AT&T laboratory eventually released their own
STREAMS library, which incorporated much of the same functionality in a
software stack with a better architecture, but the wide distribution of the
existing sockets library, together with the unfortunate omission of a function
call for polling a set of open sockets equivalent to the `select` call in the
Berkeley library, reduced the impact of the new API. Early versions of BSD
were used to form Sun Microsystems' SunOS, founding the first wave of popular
Unix workstations.

Today, BSD continues to be used as a testbed for technology by academic
organizations, as well as finding uses in a lot of commercial and free
products and, increasingly, in embedded devices. The general quality of its
source code, as well as its documentation (especially reference manual pages,
commonly referred to as man pages), make it well-suited for many purposes.

The permissive nature of the BSD license allows companies to distribute
derived products as proprietary software without exposing source code and
sometimes intellectual property to competitors. Searching for strings
containing "University of California, Berkeley" in the documentation of
products, in the static data sections of binaries and ROMs, or as part of
other information about a software program, will often show BSD code has been
used. This permissiveness also makes BSD code suitable for use in open source
products, and the license is compatible with many other open source licenses.

BSD operating systems can run much native software of several other operating
systems on the same architecture, using a binary compatibility layer. Much
simpler and faster than emulation, this allows, for instance, applications
intended for Linux to be run at effectively full speed. This makes BSDs not
only suitable for server environments, but also for workstation ones, given
the increasing availability of commercial or closed-source software for Linux
only. This also allows administrators to migrate legacy commercial
applications, which may have only supported commercial Unix variants, to a
more modern operating system, retaining the functionality of such applications
until they can be replaced by a better alternative.

Current BSD operating system variants support many of the common IEEE, ANSI,
ISO, and POSIX standards, while retaining most of the traditional BSD
behavior. Like AT&T Unix, the BSD kernel is monolithic, meaning that device
drivers in the kernel run in privileged mode, as part of the core of the
operating system.

## [edit] Significant BSD descendants

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bar chart showing the proportion of users of each BSD variant from a BSD usage
survey in 2005.[5] Each participant was permitted to indicate multiple BSD
variants

    See also: Category:BSD and Comparison of BSD operating systems
BSD has been the base of a large number of operating systems. Most notable
among these today is perhaps the major open source BSDs, FreeBSD, NetBSD and
OpenBSD, which are all derived from 386BSD and 4.4BSD-Lite, by various routes.
Both NetBSD and FreeBSD started life in 1993, initially derived from 386BSD,
but in 1994 migrating to a 4.4BSD-Lite code base. OpenBSD was forked in 1995
from NetBSD. The three most notable descendants in current use âsometimes
known as the BSDsâ have themselves spawned a number of children, including
DragonFly BSD, FreeSBIE, MirOS BSD, DesktopBSD, and PC-BSD. They are targeted
at an array of systems for different purposes and are common in government
facilities, universities and in commercial use. A number of commercial
operating systems are also partly or wholly based on BSD or its descendants,
including Sun's SunOS and Apple Inc.'s Mac OS X.

Most of the current BSD operating systems are open source and available for
download, free of charge, under the BSD License, the most notable exception
being Mac OS X. They also generally use a monolithic kernel architecture,
apart from Mac OS X and DragonFly BSD which feature hybrid kernels. The
various open source BSD projects generally develop the kernel and userland
programs and libraries together, the source code being managed using a single
central source repository.

In the past, BSD was also used as a basis for several proprietary versions of
UNIX, such as Sun's SunOS, Sequent's Dynix, NeXT's NeXTSTEP, DEC's Ultrix and
OSF/1 AXP (now Tru64 UNIX). Of these, only the last is still currently
supported in its original form. Parts of NeXT's software became the foundation
for Mac OS X, among the most commercially successful BSD variants in the
general market.

A selection of significant Unix versions and Unix-like operating systems that
descend from BSD includes:

  * FreeBSD, a major open source effort focusing on performance and the x86 platform. 
    * DragonFly BSD, a fork of FreeBSD to follow an alternative design, particularly related to SMP.
    * PC-BSD and DesktopBSD, distributions of FreeBSD with emphasis on ease of use and user friendly interfaces for the desktop/laptop PC user.
    * Nokia IPSO (IPSO SB variant), the FreeBSD-based OS used in Nokia Firewall Appliances.
    * Juniper Networks JunOS, the operating system for Juniper routers, a customized version of FreeBSD, and a variety of other embedded operating systems
    * Apple Inc.'s Darwin, the core of Mac OS X; built on the XNU kernel (part Mach, part FreeBSD, part Apple-derived code) and a userland much of which comes from FreeBSD
  * NetBSD, an open source BSD with an emphasis on portability and clean design. 
    * OpenBSD, a 1995 fork of NetBSD, focuses on portability, standardization, correctness, proactive security and integrated cryptography.
  * DEC's Ultrix, the official version of Unix for its PDP-11, VAX, and DECstation systems
  * OSF/1, a microkernel-based UNIX developed by the Open Software Foundation, incorporating the Mach kernel and parts of 4BSD 
    * Tru64 UNIX (formerly DEC OSF/1 AXP or Digital UNIX), the port of OSF/1 for DEC Alpha-based systems from DEC, Compaq and HP.
  * Early versions of Sun Microsystems SunOS (up to SunOS 4.1.4), an enhanced version of 4BSD for the Sun Motorola 68k-based Sun-2 and Sun-3 systems, SPARC-based systems, and x86-based Sun386i systems.
  * NeXT NEXTSTEP and OPENSTEP, based on the Mach kernel and 4BSD; the ancestor of Mac OS X
  * 386BSD, the first open source BSD-based operating system and the ancestor of most current BSD systems
  * DEMOS, a Soviet BSD clone
  * BSD/OS, a (now defunct) proprietary BSD for PCs

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Free software portal  
  * Comparison of BSD operating systems
  * List of BSD operating systems
  * BSD licenses
  * BSD Daemon
  * Bill Joy
  * Marshall Kirk McKusick
  * Keith Bostic
  * Ãzalp BabaoÄlu

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Mueller, Walter (2009-01-04). "2.11BSD Patch 446+447; fixes for ulrem,umount,tar,tcsh,ps,vmstat,apropos,pstat,rk". www.classiccmp.org. http://www.classiccmp.org/pipermail/cctech/2009-January/101166.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-20.
  2. ^ Babcock, Charles (2006-08-14). "What's The Greatest Software Ever Written?". InformationWeek. http://www.informationweek.com/shared/printableArticle.jhtml?articleID=191901844. Retrieved on 2009-01-20.
  3. ^ Linksvayer, Mike (1993). "The Choice of a GNU Generation - An Interview With Linus Torvalds". Meta magazine. http://gondwanaland.com/meta/history/interview.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-20.
  4. ^ "BSD Code in Windows". everything2.com. 2001-03-20. http://www.everything2.com/index.pl?node=BSD%20Code%20in%20Windows. Retrieved on 2009-01-20.
  5. ^ "BSD Usage Survey". BSD Certification Group. 2005-10-31. http://www.bsdcertification.org/downloads/pr_20051031_usage_survey_en_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-01-20.

## [edit] Bibliography

  * Marshall K. McKusick, Keith Bostic, Michael J. Karels, John S. Quartermain, The Design and Implementation of the 4.4BSD Operating System (Addison Wesley, 1996; ISBN 978-0-201-54979-9)
  * Marshall K. McKusick, George V. Neville-Neil, The Design and Implementation of the FreeBSD Operating System (Addison Wesley, August 2, 2004; ISBN 978-0-201-70245-3)
  * Samuel J. Leffler, Marshall K. McKusick, Michael J. Karels, John S. Quarterman, The Design and Implementation of the 4.3BSD UNIX Operating System (Addison Wesley, November, 1989; ISBN 978-0-201-06196-3)
  * Chris DiBona, Mark Stone, Sam Ockman, Open Source (Organization), Brian Behlendorf and J. Scott Bradner, Open Sources: Voices from the Open Source Revolution. O'Reilly & Associates, 1999. Trade paperback, 272 pages. ISBN 978-1-565-92582-3. Online version; Marshall Kirk McKusick, chapter on BSD, "Twenty Years of Berkeley Unix - From AT&T-Owned to Freely Redistributable"
  * Peter H. Salus, The Daemon, the GNU & The Penguin (Forthcoming - currently being serialised on the Groklaw website)
  * Peter H. Salus, A Quarter Century of UNIX (Addison Wesley, June 1, 1994; ISBN 978-0-201-54777-1)
  * Peter H. Salus, Casting the Net (Addison-Wesley, March 1995; ISBN 978-0-201-87674-1)

## [edit] External links

  * FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD, DragonFlyBSD, DesktopBSD and PC-BSD â Popular BSD descendants
  * A timeline of BSD and Research UNIX
  * UNIX History â History of UNIX and BSD using diagrams
  * Google's specialized BSD search
  * The BSD Certification Group
  * DistroWatch A site containing usage statistics and links for many Linux and BSD variants
  * BSD News, Search Engine, Forums and Tutorials

v â¢ d â¢ e

Unix and Unix-like operating systems  
AIX Â· BSD Â· DragonFly BSD Â· FreeBSD Â· GNU Â· HP-UX Â· IRIX Â· Linux Â·
LynxOS Â· Mac OS X Â· MINIX Â· NetBSD Â· OpenBSD Â· Plan 9 Â· QNX Â· Research
Unix Â· SCO OpenServer Â· Solaris Â· System V Â· Tru64 Â· VxWorks Â· more  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Free and open source software  
General

Copyleft Â· Events and Awards Â· Free software Â· Free Software Definition Â·
Gratis versus Libre Â· Open source software

<IMG>

<IMG> Free software  
portal  
Notable packages

Apache Â· CUPS Â· Firefox Â· GNOME Â· KDE Â· OpenOffice.org Â· Thunderbird Â·
X Window System  
Operating systems

AROS Â· BSD Â· Darwin Â· FreeDOS Â· GNU Â· Haiku Â· Linux Â· Mach Â· MINIX Â·
OpenSolaris Â· ReactOS  
Development

GCC Â· LLVM Â· Java Â· Open64 Â· Perl Â· PHP Â· Python Â· Lua Â· Ruby Â· Tcl  
History

GNU Â· Linux Â· Mozilla (Application Suite Â· Firefox Â· Thunderbird)  
Organizations

Apache Software Foundation Â· Blender Foundation Â· Eclipse Foundation Â·
FLOSS Manuals Â· freedesktop.org Â· Free Software Foundation Â· GNOME
Foundation Â· GNU Project Â· Google Code Â· Linux Foundation Â· Mozilla
Foundation Â· Open Source Geospatial Foundation Â· Open Source Initiative Â·
SourceForge Â· Xiph.Org Foundation Â· X.Org Foundation  
Licences

Apache Â· BSD Â· GNU GPL Â· LGPL Â· MIT Â· MPL Â· Permissive Â· Microsoft
Public License Â· Microsoft Reciprocal License Â· FSF approved licenses  
Challenges

Binary blob Â· Digital rights management Â· License proliferation Â· Mozilla
software rebranding Â· Proprietary software Â· SCO-Linux controversies Â·
Security Â· Software patents Â· Tivoization Â· Trusted Computing  
Other topics

Alternative terms Â· Community Â· Linux distribution Â· Forking Â· Movement Â·
Microsoft Open Specification Promise Â· Revolution OS Â· Comparison with
closed source  
List of open source software packages  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berkeley_Software_Distribution"

Categories: BSD | Free software operating systems

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Limburgs
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sardu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 26 February 2009, at 16:56.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



