
# Educational software

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

See also: List of educational software

Educational software is computer software, the primary purpose of which is
teaching or self-learning.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Early History, 1940s - 1970s
    * 1.2 History 1970s â 1980s
    * 1.3 History 1990s
  * 2 Major types of educational software
    * 2.1 Children's learning and home learning
    * 2.2 Courseware
    * 2.3 Classroom aids
    * 2.4 Edutainment
    * 2.5 Reference software
    * 2.6 Educational software on custom platforms
    * 2.7 Computer games with learning value
    * 2.8 Software in corporate training and tertiary education
    * 2.9 Software for specific educational purposes
  * 3 Selected reports and academic articles
  * 4 Products and suppliers
  * 5 References
  * 6 See also

  
## [edit] History

### [edit] Early History, 1940s - 1970s

The use of computer hardware and software in education and training dates to
the early 1940s, when American researchers developed flight simulators which
used analog computers to generate simulated onboard instrument data. One such
system was the type19 synthetic radar trainer, built in 1943. From these early
attempts in the WWII era through the mid 1970s, educational software was
directly tied to the hardware, usually mainframe computers, on which it ran.
Pioneering educational computer systems in this era included the PLATO system
(1960), developed at the University of Illinois, and TICCIT (1969). In 1963,
IBM had established a partnership with Stanford University's Institute for
Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences (IMSSS), directed by Patrick
Suppes, to develop the first comprehensive CAI elementary school curriculum
which was implemented on a large scale in schools in both California and
Mississippi.[1] In 1967 Computer Curriculum Corporation (CCC, now Pearson
Education Technologies[2]) was formed to market to schools the materials
developed through the IBM partnership. Early terminals that ran educational
systems cost over $10,000, putting them out of reach of most institutions.
Some programming languages from this period, particularly BASIC (1963), and
LOGO (1967) can also be considered educational, as they were specifically
targeted to students and novice computer users. The PLATO IV system, released
in 1972, supported many features which later became standard in educational
software running on home computers. Its features included bitmap graphics,
primitive sound generation, and support for non-keyboard input devices,
including the touchscreen.

### [edit] History 1970s â 1980s

The arrival of the personal computer, with the altair 8800 in 1975, changed
the field of software in general, with specific implications for educational
software. Whereas users prior to 1975 were dependent upon university or
government owned mainframe computers with timesharing, users after this shift
could create and use software for computers in homes and schools, computers
available for less than $2000. By the early 1980s, the availability of
personal computers including the Commodore PET, and Apple II allowed for the
creation of companies and nonprofits which specialized in educational
software. BrÃ¸derbund and the Learning Company are key companies from this
period, and MECC, the Minnesota Educational Computing Consortium, a key non-
profit software developer. These and other companies designed a range of
titles for personal computers, with the bulk of the software initially
developed for the Apple II.

### [edit] History 1990s

Major developments in educational software in the early and mid 1990s were
made possible by advances in computer hardware. Multimedia graphics and sound
were increasingly used in educational programs. CD-Roms became the preferred
method for content delivery. With the spread of the internet in the second
half of the 1990s, new methods of educational software delivery appeared. In
the history of virtual learning environments, the 1990s were a time of growth
for educational software systems, primarily due to the advent of the
affordable computer and of the Internet. Today Higher Education institutions
use virtual learning environments like Blackboard Inc. to provide greater
accessibility to learners.

## [edit] Major types of educational software

### [edit] Children's learning and home learning

An immense number of titles, probably running into the thousands, were
developed and released from the mid-1990âs onwards, aimed primarily at the
home education of younger children. Later iterations of these titles often
began to link educational content to school curricula (such as Englandâs
National Curriculum). The design of educational software programmes for home
use has been influenced strongly by computer gaming concepts â in other
words, they are designed to be fun as well as educational. However as far as
possible a distinction should be drawn between proper learning titles (such as
these) and software where the gaming outweighs the educational value
(described later).

The following are examples of childrenâs learning software which have a
structured pedagogical approach, usually orientated towards literacy and
numeracy skills.

  * Disney Interactive learning titles based on characters such as Winnie-the-Pooh, Aladdin, The Jungle Book and Mickey Mouse
  * GCompris, contains numerous activities, from computer discovery to science
  * Knowledge Adventureâs JumpStart and Math Blaster series
  * The Learning Companyâs Reader Rabbit and Zoombinis series

### [edit] Courseware

Courseware is a term that combines the words 'course' with 'software'. Its
meaning originally was used to describe additional educational material
intended as kits for teachers or trainers or as tutorials for students,
usually packaged for use with a computer. The term's meaning and usage has
expanded and can refer to the entire course and any additional material when
used in reference an online or 'computer formatted' classroom. Many companies
are using the term to describe the entire "package" consisting of one 'class'
or 'course' bundled together with the various lessons, tests, and other
material needed. The courseware itself can be in different formats, some are
only available online such as html pages, while others can be downloaded in
pdf files or other types of document files. Many forms of e-learning are now
being blended with term courseware. Most leading educational companies solicit
or include courseware with their training packages including creekcourseware.
In 1992 a company called SCORE! Educational Centers formed to deliver to
individual consumers courseware based on personalization technology that was
previously only available to select schools and the Education Program for
Gifted Youth.[3]

### [edit] Classroom aids

A further category of educational software is software designed for use in
school classrooms. Typically such software may be projected onto a large
whiteboard at the front of the class and/or run simultaneously on a network of
desktop computers in a classroom. This type of software is often called
classroom management software. While teachers often choose to use educational
software from other categories in their IT suites (e.g. reference works,
childrenâs software), a whole category of educational software has grown up
specifically intended to assist classroom teaching. Branding has been less
strong in this category than in those categories orientated towards home
users. Software titles are often very specialised and produced by a wide
variety of manufacturers, including many established educational book
publishers.

  * The schoolzone.co.uk Guide to Digital Resources, 5th ed. (2005) \- An up-to-date full-colour guide with reviews of around 500 selected and recommended products, categorised by subject area, albeit specific to the UK school system.

### [edit] Edutainment

In a broader sense, the term edutainment describes an intentional merger of
computer games and educational software into a single product (and could
therefore also comprise more serious titles described above under childrenâs
learning software). In the narrower sense used here, the term describes
educational software which is primarily about entertainment, but tends to
educate as well and sells itself partly under the educational umbrella.
Software of this kind is not structured towards school curricula, does not
normally involve educational advisors, and does not focus on core skills such
as literacy and numeracy.

### [edit] Reference software

Main article: Reference software

Many publishers of print dictionaries and encyclopedias have been involved in
the production of educational reference software since the mid-1990s. They
were joined in the reference software market by both startup companies and
established software publishers, most notably Microsoft.

The first commercial reference software products were reformulations of
existing content into CD-ROM editions, often supplemented with new multimedia
content, including compressed video and sound. More recent products made use
of internet technologies, to supplement CD-ROM products, then, more recently,
to replace them entirely.

Wikipedia and its offspins (such as Wiktionary) marked a new departure in
educational reference software. Previously, encyclopedias and dictionaries had
compiled their contents on the basis of invited and closed teams of
specialists. The Wiki concept has allowed for the development of collaborative
reference works through open cooperation incorporating experts and non-
experts.

### [edit] Educational software on custom platforms

Some manufacturers regarded normal desktop computers as an inappropriate
platform for learning software for younger children and produced custom child-
friendly pieces of hardware instead. The hardware and software is generally
combined into a single product, such as a child-sized laptop-lookalike. The
most well-known example are Leapfrog products. These include imaginatively
designed hand-held consoles with a variety of pluggable educational game
cartridges and book-like electronic devices into which a variety of electronic
books can be loaded. These products are more portable than laptop computers,
but have a much more limited range of purposes, concentrating on literacy and
numeracy.

### [edit] Computer games with learning value

These are games which were originally developed for adults or older children
and which have potential learning implications. For the most part, these games
provide simulations of different kinds of human activities, allowing players
to explore a variety of social, historical and economic processes.

For example:

  * City-building games such as the SimCity series (1989-2003) and Caesar (video game) (1993-2006) invite players to explore the social, practical and economic processes involved in city management;
  * Empire-building games such as the Civilization (video game) series (1991-2005) and the Europa Universalis series (2000-2007) help players to learn about history and its political, economic and military aspects;
  * Railroad management games such as Railroad Tycoon (1990-2003) and Rails Across America (2001) illuminate the history, engineering and economics of railroad management.

Do games such as these qualify as edutainment? To do so, they would need to
have been created with a clear educational intent. In their publicity
material, the developers of these games such as these generally focus more on
the 'fun' aspects of the games rather than their educational potential. This
might be taken as evidence of an absence of educational intent. On the other
hand, large amounts of information of an overtly educational nature may be
found within the manuals of many of these games (for example, Europa
Universalis, Railroad Tycoon and Rails Across America), suggesting that
education was indeed very much in the minds of the developers. Accordingly,
these games may be classified as edutainment.[original research?]

In any event, the games have been enthusiastically received in some
educational circles and even passed into academic literature.[1].

### [edit] Software in corporate training and tertiary education

Earlier educational software for the important corporate and tertiary
education markets was designed to run on a single desktop computer (or an
equivalent user device). The history of such software is usefully summarized
in the SCORM 2004 2nd edition Overview (section 1.3), unfortunately, however,
without precise dates. In the years immediately following 2000, planners
decided to switch to server-based applications with a high degree of
standardization. This means that educational software runs primarily on
servers which may be hundreds or thousands of miles from the actual user. The
user only receives tiny pieces of a learning module or test, fed over the
internet one by one. The server software decides on what learning material to
distribute, collects results and displays progress to teaching staff. Another
way of expressing this change is to say that educational software morphed into
an online educational service. US Governmental endorsements and approval
systems ensured the rapid switch to the new way of managing and distributing
learning material.

See also:

  * SCORM
  * Virtual learning environment, LMS (learning management system)
  * Web-based training (WBT)

### [edit] Software for specific educational purposes

There are highly specific niche markets for educational software, including:

  * Language learning software (Kverbos, Verbix, or English in a Flash, for example)
  * Typing tutors (Mario Teaches Typing or Mavis Beacon, for example)
  * Driving test software
  * Software for enabling simulated dissection of human and animal bodies (used in medical and veterinary college courses); cf. April Kung, "The Case for Educational Software in the Life Sciences" (2004)
  * Interactive geometry software
  * Medical and healthcare educational software

## [edit] Selected reports and academic articles

  * Judi Johnson, âThen, Now and Beyondâ¦ A Look at the Past 30 Years of Educational Softwareâ in Learning & Leading with Technology Volume 30 Number 7 (2003)
  * Warren Buckleitner, âThe State Of Children's Software Evaluation--Yesterday, Today And In The 21st Centuryâ in Information Technology in Childhood Education (1999), 211-220
  * Virvou, M., Katsionis, G., & Manos, K. (2005). "Combining Software Games with Education: Evaluation of its Educational Effectiveness." Educational Technology & Society, 8 (2), 54-65.
  * J. Enrique Hinostrozam & Harvey Mellar, "Considering Pedagogy in the Design, Development and Evaluation of Educational Software" (2000?)
  * Said Khalifa, Chris Bloor, Walter Middelton, Chris Jones. âEducational computer software, technical, criteria, and Qualityâ in Proceedings of the Information Systems Education Conference 2000
  * "An Environmental Scan of Childrenâs Interactive Media from 2000 to 2002" (An executive summary prepared for by Just Kid Inc., June 2002)
  * Seels, B. (1989). The instructional design movement in educational technology. Educational Technology, May, 11-15. http://www.coe.uh.edu/courses/cuin6373/idhistory/1960.html
  * Niemiec, R.P. & Walberg, H.T. (1989). From teaching machines to microcomputers: Some milestones in the history of computer-based instruction. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 21(3), 263-276. http://www.coe.uh.edu/courses/cuin6373/idhistory/ibm.html
  * DostÃ¡l, J. Educational software and computer games - tools of modern education. Journal of Technology and Information Education. 2009, Olomouc, Palacky University, Volume 1, Issue 1, p. 24 - 28. ISSN 1803-537X (print). ISSN 1803-6805 (on-line).

## [edit] Products and suppliers

  * Adventus Interactive
  * Blackboard Inc.
  * Broderbund
  * CourseInfo LLC
  * Davidson & Associates
  * Dorling Kindersley
  * Edmark
  * Futurekids
  * Inspiration Software
  * Knowledge Adventure
  * Mavis Beacon
  * Renaissance Learning
  * SchoolForge
  * SEBIT
  * Software MacKiev
  * The Learning Company
  * 3D Indiana

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Instructional Systems Development
  2. ^ Pearson Education Technologies launches concert. | North America > United States from AllBusiness.com
  3. ^ A Learning Center Thrives, and Profits, in a Poor Locale - New York Times

## [edit] See also

  * Advanced Distributed Learning
  * Authoring tool
  * Computer aided instruction
  * Computer-assisted language learning
  * E-learning
  * Educational game
  * Educational technology
  * Edutainment
  * Graphing calculator
  * History of virtual learning environments
  * Instructional technology
  * Intelligent tutoring system
  * Interactive geometry software
  * Learning management system
  * Online learning
  * SCORM
  * SLOOP Project
  * Virtual learning environment

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Educational_software"

Categories: Educational software | Educational video games | Home computer
software

Hidden categories: All articles that may contain original research | Articles
that may contain original research since July 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Äesky
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 05:00.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



