
# Open design

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

RepRap general-purpose 3D printer that not only could be used to make
structures and functional components for open design projects but is an open-
source project itself. RepRap is also being designed with the ability to make
copies of itself.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Uzebox is an open design video game console[1]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bug Labs open source hardware[2][3]

Open design is the development of physical products, machines and systems
through use of publicly shared design information. The process is generally
facilitated by the Internet and often performed without monetary compensation.
The goals and philosophy are identical to open source, but reside in a
different paradigm.

## Contents

  * 1 Sources of the open design movement
  * 2 Current directions of the open design movement
  * 3 Open machine design as compared to open-source software
  * 4 Open design organizations
  * 5 Semi-Open standards
  * 6 References
  * 7 See also
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Sources of the open design movement

The principles of open design are derived from the Free Software and Open
Source movements. [4] In 1997 Eric S. Raymond, Tim O'Reilly and Larry Augustin
established "Open Source" as an alternative expression to "Free Software," and
in 1997 Bruce Perens published the Open Source Definition. In late 1998, Dr.
Sepehr Kiani (a PhD in mechanical engineering from MIT) realized that
designers could benefit from Open Source policies, and in early 1999 he
convinced Dr. Ryan Vallance and Dr. Samir Nayfeh of the potential benefits of
open design in machine design applications.[5]. Together they established the
Open Design Foundation (ODF) as a non-profit corporation, and set out to
develop an Open Design Definition.[5].

The idea of open design was taken up, either simultaneously or subsequently,
by several other groups and individuals. The principles of open design are
closely similar to those of Open source hardware design, which emerged in
March 1998 when Reinoud Lamberts of the University of Delft proposed on his
âOpen Design Circuitsâ website the creation of a hardware design community
in the spirit of free software. [6]

## [edit] Current directions of the open design movement

The open design movement currently unites two trends. On the one hand, people
apply their skills and time to projects for the common good, perhaps where
funding or commercial interest is lacking, for developing countries or to help
to spread ecological or cheaper technologies. At the other end of the scale,
open design may provide a framework for developing very advanced projects and
technologies that might be beyond the resource of any one company or country
and involve people who, without the copyleft mechanism, might not otherwise
collaborate.

## [edit] Open machine design as compared to open-source software

The "open design" movement is currently fairly nascent but holds great
potential for the future. In some respects design and engineering are even
more suited to open collaborative development than the increasingly common
open-source software projects, because with 3D models and photographs the
concept can often be understood visually. It is not even necessary that the
project members speak the same languages to usefully collaborate.

However there are certain barriers to overcome for open design when compared
to software development where there are mature and widely used tools available
and the duplication and distribution of code cost next to nothing. Creating,
testing and modifying physical designs is not quite so straightforward because
of the effort, time and cost required to create the physical artefact;
although with access to emerging flexible computer-controlled manufacturing
techniques the complexity and effort of construction can be significantly
reduced (see tools mentioned in the fab lab article).

## [edit] Open design organizations

Open design is currently a fledgling movement consisting of several unrelated
or loosely related initiates. Many of these organizations are single, funded
projects, while a few organizations are focusing on an area needing
development.

  * Appropedia
  * VOICED (Virtual Organization for Innovative Conceptual Engineering Design)
  * OpenFarmTech
  * Instructables
  * Thingiverse
  * Akvo

## [edit] Semi-Open standards

These links relate to open standards but are not truly open in the free and
open-source sense due to license restrictions.

  * Open Design Alliance The Open Design Alliance is an association of software developers and users committed to promoting open, industry-standard formats for the exchange of CAD data.
  * IntelliCAD Technology Consortium is an independent organization committed to promoting a cooperatively developed CAD engine. The IntelliCAD Technology Consortium is one of several Founding Members of the Open Design Alliance.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ http://belogic.com/uzebox/
  2. ^ http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/009340.html
  3. ^ http://www.techcrunch.com/2007/11/01/first-pics-of-bug-labs-open-source-hardware/
  4. ^ Vallance, Kiani and Nayfeh, Open Design of Manufacturing Equipment, CIRP 1st Int. Conference on Agile, 2001
  5. ^ a b R. Ryan Vallance, Bazaar Design of Nano and Micro Manufacturing Equipment, 2000
  6. ^ http://opencollector.org/history/OpenDesignCircuits/reinoud_announce

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Free software portal  
  * Commons-based peer production
  * Machine design
  * Open source
  * Open source software
  * Open source hardware \- open-source computer and electronic hardware
  * Open Standards
  * OpenBTS

## [edit] External links

  * VOICED \- Virtual Organization for Innovative Conceptual Engineering Design]
  * Open Innovation Projects \- Community driven directory of open source innovation (open design) projects
  * Open Collaborative Design
  * Episodes of Collective Invention (Peter B. Meyer, August 2003) An article on several historical examples of what could be called "open design."
  * The Political Economy of Open Source Software (Steven Weber, June 2000) An article outlining the development of Linux from a political-science perspective. The conclusion suggests that the open-source development model is suited to disciplines besides software development.
  * worldchanging archives (Alex Steffen, November 2006) An interview with Lawrence Lessig on the use of the Developing Nations License by Architecture for Humanity to create a global open design network.
  * [1] \- Creative Commons licensed first ever open design products by designer Ronen Kadushin.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_design"

Categories: Design | Free software culture and documents

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 00:24 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



