
# Logic Pro

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Logic Pro <IMG>  
Developed by Apple Inc.  
Latest release 8.0.2 / 2008-05-21  
Operating system Mac OS X  
Type MIDI Sequencer \+ Digital Audio Workstation  
License Proprietary  
Website www.apple.com/logicstudio/logicpro/  
Logic Pro is a Digital Audio Workstation and MIDI sequencer software
application for the Mac OS X platform. Originally created by German software
developer Emagic, Logic Pro became an Apple product when Apple bought Emagic
in 2002. Logic Pro is part of Apple's Logic Studio bundle of professional
music applications.

A consumer-level version based on the same interface and audio engine but with
reduced features, called Logic Express, is also available at a reduced cost.
Apple's GarageBand, another application using Logicâs audio engine, is
bundled in iLife, a suite of software which comes included on any new
Macintosh computer.

## Contents

  * 1 History of the Logic sequencer
    * 1.1 Early history
    * 1.2 Addition of audio recording
    * 1.3 Further developments
    * 1.4 Appleâs acquisition
    * 1.5 Logic 8
  * 2 Features
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] History of the Logic sequencer

### [edit] Early history

In the mid-to-late 1980s, the German company C-Lab produced a MIDI sequencer
program for the Atari ST platform called Creator (the ST was an early favorite
among MIDI users during the mid- and late-80s). When musical notation
capabilities were added, this became Notator, and later Notator-SL. For
simplicity these three are collectively referred to as Notator.

Unlike most software sequencers (including its main rivals at the time
Performer, Vision & Cubase), which presented a song as a linear set of tracks,
Notator was a pattern-based sequencer: a song was built by recording patterns
(which might represent for example Intro, Verse, Chorus, Middle-8, Outro) with
up to 16 tracks each, and then assembling an Arrangement of these patterns,
with up to 4 patterns playing simultaneously at any one point in the song.
This more closely resembled the way that hardware sequencers of the 1970s and
1980s worked.

In its time, Notator was widely regarded (by musicians and the musical press
of the time e.g. International Musician) as one of the most powerful and
intuitive sequencing and notation programs available on any platform, but
subsequently Cubase's popularity increased and track-based sequencing
prevailed over pattern-based (a situation which continues to this
day)[citation needed].

The C-Lab programmers left that company to form Emagic, and in 1993 released a
brand new program, Notator Logic, which attempted to fuse both track- and
pattern-based operation (but looked much more similar to track-based
sequencers than to Notator). Whilst very powerful, early versions of Logic on
the Atari lacked the intuitiveness and immediacy of either Cubase or Notator,
and never achieved the same degree of success. However, by this time the Atari
was becoming obsolete, and part of the reason why it had been written from
scratch was to make it easier to port to other platforms. The Notator brand
was dropped and the software became known as simply Logic.

As subsequent versions of the software became available for Mac OS and Windows
platforms, and acquired ever more sophisticated functionality (especially in
audio processing) to take advantage of increased computing power, Logic gained
popularity again.

### [edit] Addition of audio recording

In the early 1990s, with Logic version 1.7 Emagic added the ability to record
and mix audio into the sequencer tracks, along with its existing MIDI
capabilities that had continued to be expanded as well. At the time, computers
were not fast enough to record audio in "native mode", so additional hardware
was needed to make it work, usually in the form of sound cards or DSP cards
plugged into the computer's internal bus slots, such as the NuBus slots on
Macintosh computers. Among the systems that worked with Logic 3 were
Digidesign's Audiomedia card and Pro Tools III.

In the mid 1990s, Emagic released the Logic version 4, and their Audiowerk
audio interface, introducing the ability for Logic to record and mix audio
without requiring additional hardware, although the track counts and
processing possibilities were significantly limited by the speed of the
computers of those times, which were very slow relative to current systems.

### [edit] Further developments

Logic 5 featured significant improvements in user interface, and increased
compatibility with more types of computers, operating systems, and a wide
range of audio interfaces.

With Logic 6, Emagic added the availability of separately packaged software
products that were closely integrated add-ons developed specifically for use
with Logic, including software instruments, the EXS sampler and audio
processing plug-ins. The Logic 6 package also included the stand-alone program
Waveburner, for burning redbook audio CD standard-compliant CDR masters for
replication, however, that application was considered a free bonus feature; it
was not advertised as part of the package and did not include printed
documentation. PDF documentation was included on the installer disc.

### [edit] Appleâs acquisition

Apple acquired Emagic in July 2002.[1] Support for the Windows version was
dropped with the release of Logic 6 shortly thereafter.

In late 2004, Apple released version 7 of Logic Pro, consolidating over 20
different Emagic products, including all instrument and effect plug-ins,
Waveburner Pro (CD Authoring application), and Pro Tools TDM support, into a
single product package. Apple also released a scaled down version of Logic
called Logic Express, replacing two previous versions that filled that
position called Logic Silver and Logic Gold. Apple began promoting Logic Pro
as one of its flagship software âProâ applications for the Macintosh
platform. Logic was also used as the basis for a modified application titled
GarageBand, included as a part of OS X iLife.

Additions to Logic Pro 7 included: the integration of Apple Loops, Distributed
Audio Processing (an innovative technology for combining the power of multiple
computers on a network), 3 new instruments including Sculpture (a sound
modeling synth) and Ultrabeat (a drum synth and sequencer), and 9 new effect
plug-ins including Guitar Amp Pro (guitar amp simulator), and a linear phase
corrected version of their 6 channel parametric equalizer. In total, Logic Pro
7 now included 70 effect plug-ins and 34 instrument plug-ins. Pro-Tools TDM
compatibility, which had been a feature of Logic since version 3.5, was not
supported by Logic 7.2 on Intel-based Mac computers[2]; TDM support returned
with the release of Logic 8.

### [edit] Logic 8

On September 12, 2007, Apple released the Logic Studio suite that includes
Logic Pro 8. Logic Pro is no longer a separate product, although Logic Express
8, which was released on the same day, remains a separate product.

Significant changes were made for Logic 8. Alongside changes such as the new
processing plug-in (Delay Designer), Apple has included features such as Quick
Swipe Comping, similar to Soundtrack Pro 2, and multi-take management. Apple
also made changes to ease of use. These include the discontinuation of the
XSKey dongle and a streamlined, single window interface, which is in some ways
similar to that of Ableton Live, but highly customizable, or similar to the
interface in Digital Performer.

Other additions to the new interface include consolidated arrange windows,
dual channel strips, built in browsers (like that in GarageBand) and
production templates.

During early 2008, R&B artist Usher released a track titled Love In This Club
(produced by Polow Da Don) that was entirely formed of Logic's built in
loops.[citation needed]

## [edit] Features

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Space Designer plugin attempts to emulate the characteristic echo and
reverberation of a physical environment, using a technique called convolution.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Ringshifter effect, new in version 7, which adds a 'metallic sheen' to
music.

Logic Pro provides software instruments, synthesizers, audio effects and
recording facilities for music synthesis. It also supports Apple Loops -
professionally-recorded instrument loops that can be used as beats and are
royalty-free. Audio effects include distortions, dynamics processors,
equalization filters and delays. The Space Designer plugin, for example,
simulates the acoustics of audio played in different environments, such as
rooms of varying size, or producing the echoes that might be heard on high
mountains. Logic can work with MIDI keyboards and control surfaces for input
and processing. It also features real-time scoring in musical notation,
supporting guitar tablature, chord abbreviations and drum notation.

Logic Pro and Express share much functionality and the same interface. Logic
Express is limited to two-channel stereo mixdown, while Logic Pro can handle
multichannel surround sound. Both can handle up to 255 audio tracks, depending
on system performance (CPU and hard disk throughput and seek time).

The application also features distributed processing abilities, which can
function across an Ethernet LAN. One machine runs the Logic Pro app, while the
other machines on the network run the Logic node app. Logic will then offload
the effects and synth processing to the other machines on the network. If the
network is fast enough (i.e. gigabit Ethernet) this can work in near-real
time, depending on buffer settings and CPU loads. This allows users to combine
the power of several Macintosh computers to process Logic Proâs built-in
software instruments and plug-ins, and 3rd party processing plug-ins.

## [edit] See also

  * Logic Studio
  * Logic Express
  * Logic Control
  * Audio Units
  * Core Audio

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Apple Acquires Emagic". Apple, Inc.. http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2002/jul/01emagic.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-13.
  2. ^ According to Digidesignâs compatibility document for Pro Tools TDM HD 7.2 and 7.3, Logic Pro will require a future update from Apple to support Pro Tools HD DAE for Intel-based Macs."

## [edit] External links

  * Official Logic Pro home page
  * Logic Pro Tech Specs
  * Logic Resources
  * RU Mac Users Wiki Logic Pro Reference
  * List of celebrity Logic Pro users
  * The History of Logic
  * WikiAudio.org Logic tutorials

v â¢ d â¢ e

Logic Studio  
Applications

Logic Pro 8 Â· MainStage Â· Soundtrack Pro 2 Â· Studio Effects Â· Studio
Instruments Â· Studio Sound Library  
Utilities

Apple Loops Utility Â· Compressor 3 Â· Impulse Response Utility Â· WaveBurner
Pro  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Apple Inc. software  
OS

Darwin Â· Mac OS X (Public Beta Â· "Cheetah" Â· "Puma" Â· "Jaguar" Â·
"Panther" Â· "Tiger" Â· "Leopard" Â· "Snow Leopard") Â· iPhone OS  
Consumer

Bento Â· MobileMe Â· iLife (iMovie Â· iDVD Â· iPhoto Â· GarageBand Â· iWeb Â·
iTunes) Â· iWork (Keynote Â· Pages Â· Numbers Â· iWork.com)  
Prosumer

Final Cut Express Â· Logic Express  
Professional

Aperture Â· FileMaker Pro Â· Final Cut Studio (Final Cut Pro Â· DVD Studio Pro
Â· Motion Â· Soundtrack Pro Â· Color Â· Compressor) Â· Logic Studio Â· Shake  
Bundled

Front Row Â· iChat Â· Mail Â· Photo Booth Â· QuickTime Â· Safari Â· TextEdit  
Server

Apple Remote Desktop Â· Mac OS X Server Â· WebObjects Â· Xsan  
Developer

Dashcode Â· Instruments Â· Interface Builder Â· Quartz Composer Â· Xcode  
Discontinued

.Mac Â· AppleWorks Â· HyperCard Â· Mac OS (System 6, 7 Â· Mac OS 8, 9) Â·
MacDraw Â· MacPaint Â· MacProject Â· MacTerminal Â· MacWrite Â· ResEdit  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logic_Pro"

Categories: Music software | Audio editors | Mac OS-only software made by
Apple Inc. | Mac OS X music creation software

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since July 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 06:47.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



