
# Spanish Inquisition

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Spanish Inquisition (disambiguation).

<IMG>

Constructs such as ibid., op. cit. and loc. cit. are discouraged by
Wikipedia's style guide for footnotes as they are easily broken. Please
improve this article by replacing them with named references (quick guide), or
an abbreviated title.  
<IMG>

<IMG>

The seal of the Spanish Inquisition depicts the cross, the branch and the
sword.

The Spanish Inquisition was an ecclesiastical tribunal started in 1478 by
Catholic Monarchs Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile. It was
intended to maintain Catholic orthodoxy in their kingdoms, and to replace the
medieval inquisition which was under papal control. The new body was under the
direct control of the Spanish monarchy. It was not definitively abolished
until 1834, during the reign of Isabella II.

The Inquisition, as an ecclesiastical tribunal, had jurisdiction only over
baptized Christians. The Inquisition worked in large part to ensure the
orthodoxy of recent converts.

## Contents

  * 1 Precedents
    * 1.1 Background
  * 2 Activity of the Inquisition
    * 2.1 The start of the Inquisition
    * 2.2 Repression of Jews
    * 2.3 Repression of Muslims
      * 2.3.1 Demographic consequences
    * 2.4 Repression of Protestants
    * 2.5 Censorship
    * 2.6 Other offenses
  * 3 Organization
  * 4 Composition of the tribunals
  * 5 Functioning of the inquisition
    * 5.1 Accusation
    * 5.2 Detention
    * 5.3 The trial
    * 5.4 Sentencing
    * 5.5 The Autos de Fe
  * 6 End of the Inquisition
  * 7 Death tolls
  * 8 Henningsen-Contreras statistics for the period 1540-1700
  * 9 Historiography
    * 9.1 The Spanish "Black Legend"
    * 9.2 Professional historians
    * 9.3 Modern Scholarship
  * 10 The Spanish Inquisition in the Arts
    * 10.1 Literature
    * 10.2 Film
    * 10.3 Theatre, music, and television
    * 10.4 Other
  * 11 In Language
  * 12 See also
  * 13 References and footnotes
  * 14 Further reading
  * 15 External links

  
## [edit] Precedents

An inquisition was created through papal bull Ad Abolendam, issued at the end
of the 12th century by Pope Lucius III as a way to combat the Albigensian
heresy in southern France. There were a huge number of tribunals of the Papal
Inquisition in various European kingdoms during the Middle Ages. In the
Kingdom of Aragon, a tribunal of the Papal Inquisition was established by the
statute of Excommunicamus of Pope Gregory IX, in 1232, during the era of the
Albigensian heresy. Its principal representative was Raimundo de PeÃ±afort.
With time, its importance was diluted, and, by the middle of the 15th century,
it was almost forgotten although still there according to the law.

There was never a tribunal of the Papal Inquisition in Castile. Members of the
episcopate were charged with surveillance of the faithful and punishment of
transgressors. During the Middle Ages, in Castile, little attention was paid
to heresy.[citation needed]

### [edit] Background

The Spanish Inquisition was created by a multi-religious nature of Spanish
society following the reconquest of the Iberian Peninsula from the Moors
(Muslims). Much of the Iberian Peninsula was dominated by Moors following
their invasion of the peninsula in 711 until they were expelled by means of a
long campaign of reconquest. However, the reconquest did not result in the
full expulsion of Muslims from Spain, but instead yielded a multi-religious
society made up of Catholics, Jews and Muslims. Granada to the south, in
particular remained under Moorish control until 1492, and large cities,
especially Seville, Valladolid, and Barcelona, had large Jewish populations
centered in "JuderÃ­a".
http://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=es&u=http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Call&ei=1OPASaX0CIGEsQOc4P0v&sa=X&oi=translate&resnum=1&ct=result&prev=/search%3Fq%3DJuder%25C3%25ADas%26hl%3Den%26client%3Dfirefox-a%26rls%3Dorg.mozilla:en-
US:official%26hs%3DABa. .[1]

The reconquest produced a relatively peaceful co-existence â although not
without periodic conflicts â among Christians, Jews, and Muslims in the
peninsula's kingdoms. There was a long tradition of Jewish service to the
crown of Aragon. Ferdinand's father John II named the Jewish Abiathar Crescas
to be Court Astronomer. Jews occupied many important posts, religious and
political. Castile itself had an unofficial rabbi. Nevertheless, in some parts
of Spain towards the end of the 14th century, there was a wave of anti-
Judaism, encouraged by the preaching of Ferrant Martinez, Archdeacon of Ecija.
The pogroms of June 1391 were especially bloody: in Seville, hundreds of Jews
were killed, and the synagogue was completely destroyed. The number of people
killed was equally high in other cities, such as CÃ³rdoba, Valencia and
Barcelona.[2]

One of the consequences of these disturbances was the mass conversion of Jews.
Before this date, conversions were rare and tended to be motivated more for
social rather than religious reasons.[citation needed] But from the 15th
century, a new social group appeared: conversos, also called New Christians,
who were distrusted by Jews and Christians alike for their religious beliefs.
By converting, Jews could not only escape eventual persecution, but also
obtain entry into many offices and posts that were being prohibited to Jews
through new, more strict regulations. But converting was a hard long process
involving many crucial steps and could not be done overnight. Many conversos
attained important positions in 15th century Spain. Among many others,
physicians AndrÃ©s Laguna and Francisco Lopez Villalobos (Ferdinand's court
physician), writers Juan del Enzina, Juan de Mena, Diego de Valera and Alonso
de Palencia, and bankers Luis de Santangel and Gabriel Sanchez (who financed
the voyage of Christopher Colombus) were all conversos. Conversos \- not
without opposition - managed to attain high positions in the ecclesiastical
hierarchy, at times becoming severe detractors of Judaism.[3] Some even
received titles of nobility, and as a result, during the following century
some works attempted to demonstrate that virtually all of the nobles of Spain
were descended from Jews.[4]

## [edit] Activity of the Inquisition

### [edit] The start of the Inquisition

Alonso de Hojeda, a Dominican from Seville, convinced Queen Isabel of the
existence of Crypto-Judaism among Andalusian conversos during her stay in
Seville between 1477 and 1478.[5] A report, produced at the request of the
monarchs by Pedro GonzÃ¡lez de Mendoza, Archbishop of Seville and by the
Segovian Dominican TomÃ¡s de Torquemada, corroborated this assertion. The
monarchs decided to introduce the Inquisition to Castile to uncover and do
away with false converts, and requested the Pope's assent. At first the
request was turned down for a number of reasons. One reason was that they had
requested the Spanish Inquisition to be under the control of the monarchs of
Spain. This in turn would lessen papal authority over the clergy involved and
make methods difficult to keep in line with official papal rules of
inquisition, and instead easily become a mere political and semi-military tool
of Spain. Ferdinand pressured Sixtus IV by threatening to withdraw military
support at a time when the Turks were threating Catholic Europe. On November
1, 1477, Pope Sixtus IV published the bill Exigit Sinceras Devotionis
Affectus, through which the Inquisition was established in the Kingdom of
Castile. The bill also gave the monarchs exclusive authority to name the
inquisitors. The first two inquisitors, Miguel de Morillo and Juan de San
MartÃ­n were not named, however, until two years later, on September 27, 1480
in Medina del Campo.

At first, the activity of the Inquisition was limited to the dioceses of
Seville and Cordoba, where Alonso de Hojeda had detected the center of
converso activity. The first auto de fe was celebrated in Seville on February
6, 1481: six people were burned alive. The sermon was given by the same Alonso
de Hojeda whose suspicions had given birth to the Inquisition. From there, the
Inquisition grew rapidly in the Kingdom of Castile. By 1492, tribunals existed
in eight Castilian cities: Ãvila, CÃ³rdoba, JaÃ©n, Medina del Campo, Segovia,
SigÃ¼enza, Toledo and Valladolid.

Establishing the new Inquisition in the Kingdom of AragÃ³n was more difficult.
In reality, Ferdinand did not resort to new appointments, he simply
resuscitated the old Pontifical Inquisition, submitting it to his direct
control. The population of AragÃ³n was obstinately opposed to the Inquisition.
In addition, differences between Ferdinand and Sixtus IV prompted the latter
to promulgate a new bull categorically prohibiting the Inquisition's extension
to Aragon. In this bull, the Pope unambiguously criticized the procedures of
the Inquisitorial court, affirming that,

> many true and faithful Christians, because of the testimony of enemies,
rivals, slaves and other low people--and still less appropriate--without tests
of any kind, have been locked up in secular prisons, tortured and condemned
like relapsed heretics, deprived of their goods and properties, and given over
to the secular arm to be executed, at great danger to their souls, giving a
pernicious example and causing scandal to many.[6]

Nevertheless, pressure by Ferdinand caused the Pope to suspend this bull,[7]
and even promulgate another one, on October 17, 1483, naming TomÃ¡s de
Torquemada Inquisidor General of AragÃ³n, Valencia and Catalonia. In 1484 Pope
Innocent VIII attempted to allow appeals to Rome against the Inquisition, but
Ferdinand in December 1484 and again in 1509 decreed death and confiscation
for anyone trying to make use of such procedures without royal permission.[8]
With this, the Inquisition became the only institution that held authority
across all the realms of the Spanish monarchy, and, in all of them, a useful
mechanism at the service of the crown. However, the cities of AragÃ³n
continued resisting, and even saw revolt, as in Teruel from 1484 to 1485.
However, the murder of Inquisidor Pedro ArbuÃ©s in Zaragoza on September 15,
1485, caused public opinion to turn against the conversos and in favour of the
Inquisition. In AragÃ³n, the Inquisitorial courts were focused specifically on
members of the powerful converso minority, ending their influence in the
Aragonese administration.

The Inquisition was extremely active between 1480 and 1530. Different sources
give different estimates of the number of trials and executions in this
period; Henry Kamen estimates about 2,000 executed, based on the documentation
of the Autos de FÃ©, the great majority being conversos of Jewish origin. He
offers striking statistics: 91.6% of those judged in Valencia between 1484 and
1530 and 99.3% of those judged in Barcelona between 1484 and 1505 were of
Jewish origin.[9]

### [edit] Repression of Jews

The number of Jews who left Spain is not even approximately known. Historians
of the period give extremely high figures: Juan de Mariana speaks of 800,000
people, and Don Isaac Abravanel of 300,000. Modern estimates are much lower:
Henry Kamen estimates that, of a population of approximately 80,000 Jews,
about one half or 40,000 chose emigration.[10] The Jews of the kingdom of
Castile emigrated mainly to Portugal (from where they were expelled in 1497)
and to Morocco. However, according to Henry Kamen, the Jews of the kingdom of
Aragon, went "to adjacent Christian lands, mainly to Italy," rather than to
Muslim lands as is often assumed.[11] Much later the Sefardim, descendants of
Spanish Jews, established communities in many cities of Europe, North Africa,
and the Ottoman Empire.

Jews were baptised in the three months before the deadline for expulsion, some
40,000 if one accepts the totals given by Kamen: most of these undoubtedly to
avoid expulsion, rather than a sincere change of faith. These conversos were
the principal concern of the Inquisition; continuing to practice Judaism put
them at risk of denunciation and trial.

The most intense period of persecution of conversos lasted until 1530. From
1531 to 1560, however, the percentage of conversos among the Inquisition
trials dropped to 3% of the total. There was a rebirth of persecutions when a
group of crypto-Jews was discovered in Quintanar de la Orden in 1588; and
there was a rise in denunciations of conversos in the last decade of the 16th
century. At the beginning of the 17th century, some conversos who had fled to
Portugal began to return to Spain, fleeing the persecution of the Portuguese
Inquisition, founded in 1532. This led to a rapid increase in the trials of
crypto-Jews, among them a number of important financiers. In 1691, during a
number of Autos de Fe in Majorca, 36 chuetas, or conversos of Majorca, were
burned.

During the 18th century the number of conversos accused by the Inquisition
decreased significantly. Manuel Santiago Vivar, tried in Cordoba in 1818, was
the last person tried for being a crypto-Jew.

### [edit] Repression of Muslims

The Inquisition did not exclusively target Jewish conversos (marranos) and
Protestants, but also the moriscos, converts to Catholicism from Islam. The
moriscos were mostly concentrated in the recently conquered kingdom of
Granada, in Aragon, and in Valencia. Officially, all Muslims in Castile had
been converted to Christianity in 1502. Those in Aragon and Valencia were
obliged to convert by Charles I's decree of 1526, as most had been forcibly
baptized during the Revolt of the Brotherhoods (1519â1523) and these
baptisms were declared to be valid.

Many Moriscos were suspected of practicing Islam in secret, and the jealousy
with which they guarded the privacy of their domestic life prevented the
verification of this suspicion.[12] Initially they were not severely
persecuted, but experienced a policy of peaceful evangelization, a policy
never followed with Jewish converts. There were various reasons for this: in
the kingdoms of Valencia and Aragon, a large majority of the moriscos were
under the jurisdiction of the nobility and persecution would have been viewed
as a frontal assault on the economic interests of this powerful social class.
Still, fears ran high among the population that the Moriscos were traitorous,
especially in Granada. The coast was regularly raided by the Barbary pirates
backed by the Ottoman Empire, which did not augur good relations between
Christians and (former) Muslims as the Moriscos were suspected of aiding the
North African raiders. As a result, rather than being seen as full Christians,
the moriscos were kept separate and viewed with suspicion.

In the second half of the century, late in the reign of Philip II, conditions
worsened between Christians and Moriscos. The 1568â1570 Morisco Revolt in
Granada was harshly suppressed, and the Inquisition intensified its attention
upon the moriscos. From 1570 morisco cases became predominant in the tribunals
of Zaragoza, Valencia and Granada; in the tribunal of Granada, between 1560
and 1571, 82% of those accused were moriscos.[13] Thus according to Kamen, the
moriscos did not experience the same harshness as Jewish conversos and
Protestants, and the number of capital punishments was proportionally
less.[14]

In 1609 King Philip III, upon the advice of his financial adviser the Duke of
Lerma and Archbishop of Valencia Juan de Ribera, decreed the Expulsion of the
Moriscos. Hundreds of thousands of converts from Islam to Catholicism were
expelled, some of them probably sincere Christians. This was further fueled by
the religious intolerance of Archbishop Ribera who quoted the Old Testament
texts ordering the enemies of God to be slain without mercy and setting forth
the duties of kings to extirpate them.[15] The edict required: 'The Moriscos
to depart, under the pain of death and confiscation, without trial or
sentence... to take with them no money, bullion, jewels or bills of
exchange.... just what they could carry.'[16] So successful was the enterprise
, in the space of months, Spain was emptied of its Moriscos and Moors.
Expelled were the Moors of Aragon, Murcia, Catalonia, Castile, Mancha and
Extremadura. As for the Moriscos of Granada, such as the Herrador family who
held positions in the Church and magistracy, they still had to struggle
against exile and confiscation.[17]

An indeterminate number of moriscos remained in Spain and, during the 17th
century, the Inquisition pursued some trials against them of minor importance:
according to Kamen, between 1615 and 1700, cases against moriscos constituted
only 9 percent of those judged by the Inquisition.

#### [edit] Demographic consequences

In December 2008, a genetic study of the current population of the Iberian
Peninsula, published in the American Journal of Human Genetics, found that
about 10% have North-African as ancestors and 20% have Sephardi Jews as
ancestors. The authors conclude from these studies that the Sephardi had
resided in the Iberian Peninsula for longer then the Moors. Since there is no
direct link between genetic makeup and religious affiliation, however, it is
difficult to draw direct conclusions between their findings and forced or
voluntary conversion[18]. Nevertheless, the Sephardic result is in
contradiction [19][20][21][22][23] or not replicated in all the body of
genetic studies done in Iberia and has been later questioned by the authors
themselves [24][25][26][27] and by Stephen Oppenheimer who estimates that much
earlier migrations, 5000 to 10,000 years ago from the Eastern Mediterranean
might also have accounted for the Sephardic estimates: "They are really
assuming that they are looking at his migration of Jewish immigrants, but the
same lineages could have been introduced in the Neolithic"[28]. The rest of
genetic studies done in Spain estimate the Moorish contribution ranging from
2.5/3.4%[29] to 7.7%[30].

### [edit] Repression of Protestants

Conversos saw the 1516 arrival of Charles I, the new king of Spain, as a
possible end to the Inquisition, or at least a reduction of its influence.
Nevertheless, despite reiterated petitions from the Cortes of Castile and
Aragon, the new monarch left the inquisitorial system intact.[31]

During the 16th century, however, the majority of trials were not focused on
conversos. Instead, the Inquisition became an efficient mechanism for pruning
the buds of Protestantism that had begun reaching into Spain. Some claim that
a large percentage of these Protestants were of Jewish origin.[citation
needed]

Despite much popular myth about the Inquisition relating to Protestants, it
dealt with very few cases involving actual Protestants, as there were so few
in Spain. About 100 persons in Spain were found to be Protestants and turned
over to the secular authorities for execution in the 1560s[citation needed]
and in the last decades of the century, an additional 200 Spaniards were
accused of being followers of Luther. âMost of them were in no sense
Protestants...Irreligious sentiments, drunken mockery, anticlerical
expressions, were all captiously classified by the inquisitors (or by those
who denounced the cases) as âLutheran.â Disrespect to church images, and
eating meat on forbidden days, were taken as signs of heresy.â[32]

The first of these trials were those against the sect of mystics known as the
"Alumbrados" of Guadalajara and Valladolid. The trials were long, and ended
with prison sentences of differing lengths, though none of the sect were
executed. Nevertheless, the subject of the "Alumbrados" put the Inquisition on
the trail of many intellectuals and clerics who, interested in Erasmian ideas,
had strayed from orthodoxy (which is striking because both Charles I and
Philip II of Spain were confessed admirers of Erasmus). Such was the case with
the humanist Juan de ValdÃ©s, who was forced to flee to Italy to escape the
process that had been begun against him, and the preacher, Juan de Ãvila, who
spent close to a year in prison.

The first trials against Lutheran groups, as such, took place between 1558 and
1562, at the beginning of the reign of Philip II, against two communities of
Protestants from the cities of Valladolid and Seville.[33] The trials signaled
a notable intensification of the Inquisition's activities. A number of
enormous Autos de Fe were held, some of them presided over by members of the
royal family.[34] After 1562, though the trials continued, the repression was
much reduced, and it is estimated that only a dozen Spaniards were burned
alive for Lutheranism by the end of the 16th century, although some 200 faced
trial.[35] The Autos de Fe of the mid-century virtually put an end to Spanish
Protestantism which was, throughout, a small phenomenon to begin with - last
remainders claimed to have survived in Netanya, Israel in the form of secluded
orders, led by Irene Molochovski.

### [edit] Censorship

<IMG>

<IMG>

An image frequently misinterpreted as the Spanish Inquisition burning
prohibited books. This is actually Pedro Berruguete's La Prueba del Fuego
(1400s). It depicts a legend of St Dominic's dispute with the Cathars: they
both consign their writings into the flames, and while the Cathars' text burn,
St Dominic's miraculously leaps from the flames.

As one manifestation of the Counter-Reformation, the Spanish Inquisition
worked actively to impede the diffusion of heretical ideas in Spain by
producing "Indexes" of prohibited books. Such lists of prohibited books were
common in Europe a decade before the Inquisition published its first. The
first Index published in Spain in 1551 was, in reality, a reprinting of the
Index published by the University of Louvain in 1550, with an appendix
dedicated to Spanish texts. Subsequent Indexes were published in 1559, 1583,
1612, 1632, and 1640. The Indexes included an enormous number of books of all
types, though special attention was dedicated to religious works, and,
particularly, vernacular translations of the bible.

Included the Indexes, at one point, were many of the great works of Spanish
literature. Also, a number of religious writers who are today considered
saints by the Catholic Church saw their works appear in the Indexes. At first,
this might seem counter-intuitive or even nonsensical â how were these
Spanish authors published in the first place if their texts were only to be
prohibited by the Inquisition and placed in the Index? The answer lies in the
process of publication and censorship in Early Modern Spain. Books in Early
Modern Spain faced prepublication licensing and approval (which could include
modification) by both secular and religious authorities. However, once
approved and published, the circulating text also faced the possibility of
post-hoc censorship by being denounced to the Inquisition â sometimes
decades later. Likewise, as Catholic theology evolved, once prohibited texts
might be removed from the Index.

At first, inclusion in the Index meant total prohibition of a text; however,
this proved not only impractical and unworkable, but also contrary to the
goals of having a literate and well educated clergy. Works with one line of
suspect dogma would be prohibited in their entirety, despite the remainder of
the text's sound dogma. In time, a compromise solution was adopted in which
trusted Inquisition officials blotted out words, lines or whole passages of
otherwise acceptable texts, thus allowing these expurgated editions to
circulate. Although in theory the Indexes imposed enormous restrictions on the
diffusion of culture in Spain, some historians, such as Henry Kamen, argue
that such strict control was impossible in practice and that there was much
more liberty in this respect than is often believed. And Irving Leonard has
conclusively demonstrated that, despite repeated royal prohibitions, romances
of chivalry, such as Amadis of Gaul, found their way to the New World with the
blessing of the Inquisition. Moreover, with the coming of the Age of
Enlightenment in the 18th century, increasing numbers of licenses to possess
and read prohibited texts were granted.

Despite repeated publication of the Indexes and a large bureaucracy of
censors, the activities of the Inquisition did not impede the flowering of
Spanish literature's "Siglo de Oro," although almost all of its major authors
crossed paths with the Holy Office at one point or another. Among the Spanish
authors included in the Index are: BartolomÃ© Torres Naharro, Juan del Enzina,
Jorge de Montemayor, Juan de ValdÃ©s and Lope de Vega, as well as the
anonymous Lazarillo de Tormes and the Cancionero General by Hernando del
Castillo. La Celestina, which was not included in the Indexes of the 16th
century, was expurgated in 1632 and prohibited in its entirety in 1790. Among
the non-Spanish authors prohibited were Ovid, Dante, Rabelais, Ariosto,
Machiavelli, Erasmus, Jean Bodin and Thomas More, known in Spain as TomÃ¡s
Moro. One of the most outstanding and best known cases in which the
Inquisition directly confronted literary activity is with Fray Luis de LeÃ³n,
noted humanist and religious writer of converso origin, who was imprisoned for
four years (from 1572 to 1576) for having translated the Song of Songs
directly from Hebrew.

### [edit] Other offenses

<IMG>

<IMG>

Two priests ask a heretic to repent as he is tortured.

Although the Inquisition was created to halt the advance of heresy, it also
occupied itself with a wide variety of offences that only indirectly could be
related to religious heterodoxy. Of a total of 49,092 trials from the period
1560â1700 registered in the archive of the Suprema, appear the following:
judaizantes (5,007); moriscos (11,311); Lutherans (3,499); alumbrados (149);
superstitions (3,750); heretical propositions (14,319); bigamy (2,790);
solicitation (1,241); offences against the Holy Office of the Inquisition
(3,954); miscellaneous (2,575).[citation needed]

This data demonstrates that not only New Christians (conversos of Jewish or
Islamic descent) and Protestants faced investigation, but also professing
Catholics could be targeted for various reasons.

The category "superstitions" includes trials related to witchcraft. The witch-
hunt in Spain had much less intensity than in other European countries
(particularly France, England, and Germany). One remarkable case was that of
LogroÃ±o, in which the witches of Zugarramurdi in Navarre were persecuted.
During the auto de fÃ© that took place in LogroÃ±o on November 7 and November
8, 1610, 6 people were burned and another 5 burned in effigy.[36] In general,
nevertheless, the Inquisition maintained a sceptical attitude towards cases of
witchcraft, considering it as a mere superstition without any basis. Alonso de
Salazar FrÃ­as, who, after the trials of LogroÃ±o took the Edict of Faith to
various parts of Navarre, noted in his report to the Suprema that, "There were
no witches nor bewitched in the region after beginning to speak and write
about them".[37]

Included under the rubric of heretical propositions were verbal offences, from
outright blasphemy to questionable statements regarding religious beliefs,
from issues of sexual morality, to misbehaviour of the clergy. Many were
brought to trial for affirming that simple fornication (sex without the
explicit aim of procreation) was not a sin or for putting in doubt different
aspects of Christian faith such as Transubstantiation or the virginity of
Mary. Also, members of the clergy itself were occasionally accused of
heretical propositions. These offences rarely lead to severe penalties.

The Inquisition also pursued offences against morals, at times in open
conflict with the jurisdictions of civil tribunals. In particular, there were
numerous trials for bigamy, a relatively frequent offence in a society that
only permitted divorce under the most extreme circumstances. In the case of
men, the penalty was five years in the galley (tantamount to a death
sentence). Women too were accused of bigamy. Also, many cases of solicitation
during confession were adjudicated, indicating a strict vigilance over the
clergy.

Inquisitorial repression of the sexual offences of homosexuality and
bestiality, considered, according to Canon Law, crimes against nature, merits
separate attention. Homosexuality, known at the time as sodomy, was punished
by death by civil authorities. It fell under the jurisdiction of the
Inquisition only in the territories of Aragon, when, in 1524, Clement VII, in
a papal brief, granted jurisdiction over sodomy to the Inquisition of Aragon,
whether or not it was related to heresy. In Castile, cases of sodomy were not
adjudicated, unless related to heresy. The tribunal of Zaragoza distinguished
itself for its severity in judging these offences: between 1571 and 1579 more
than 100 men accused of sodomy were processed and at least 36 were executed;
in total, between 1570 and 1630 there were 534 trials and 102 executions.[38]

In 1815, Francisco Xavier de Mier y Campillo, the Inquisitor General of the
Spanish Inquisition and the Bishop of AlmerÃ­a, suppressed Freemasonry and
denounced the lodges as âsocieties which lead to atheism, to sedition and to
all errors and crimes.â[39] He then instituted a purge during which
Spaniards could be arrested on the charge of being âsuspected of
Freemasonryâ.[39]

## [edit] Organization

Beyond its role in religious affairs, the Inquisition was also an institution
at the service of the monarchy. The Inquisitor General, in charge of the Holy
Office, was designated by the crown. The Inquisitor General was the only
public office whose authority stretched to all the kingdoms of Spain
(including the American viceroyalties), except for a brief period
(1507â1518) during where there were two Inquisitor Generals, one in the
kingdom of Castile, and the other in Aragon.

The Inquisitor General presided over the Council of the Supreme and General
Inquisition (generally abbreviated as "Council of the Suprema"), created in
1483, which was made up of six members named directly by the crown (the number
of members of the Suprema varied over the course of the Inquisition's history,
but it was never more than 10). Over time, the authority of the Suprema grew
at the expense of the power of the Inquisitor General.

The Suprema met every morning, save for holidays, and for two hours in the
afternoon on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. The morning sessions were
devoted to questions of faith, while the afternoons were reserved for cases of
sodomy, bigamy, witchcraft, etc.[40]

Below the Suprema were the different tribunals of the Inquisition, which were,
in their origins, itinerant, installing themselves where they were necessary
to combat heresy, but later being established in fixed locations. In the first
phase, numerous tribunals were established, but the period after 1495 saw a
marked tendency towards centralization.

In the kingdom of Castile, the following permanent tribunals of the
Inquisition were established:

  * 1482 In Seville and in Cordoba.
  * 1485 In Toledo and in Llerena.
  * 1488 In Valladolid and in Murcia.
  * 1489 In Cuenca.
  * 1505 In Las Palmas (Canary Islands).
  * 1512 In LogroÃ±o.
  * 1526 In Granada.
  * 1574 In Santiago de Compostela.

There were only four tribunals in the kingdom of Aragon: Zaragoza and Valencia
(1482), Barcelona (1484), and Majorca (1488).[41] Ferdinand the Catholic also
established the Spanish Inquisition in Sicily (1513), housed in Palermo and
Sardinia.[42] In the Americas, tribunals were established in Lima and in
Mexico City (1569) and, in 1610, in Cartagena de Indias (present day
Colombia).

## [edit] Composition of the tribunals

Initially, each of the tribunals included two inquisitors, a calificador, an
alguacil (bailiff) and a fiscal (prosecutor); new positions were added as the
institution matured.

The inquisitors were preferably jurists more than theologians, and, in 1608,
Philip III even stipulated that all the inquisitors must have a background in
law. The inquisitors did not typically remain in the position for a long time:
for the Court of Valencia, for example, the average tenure in the position was
about two years.[43] Most of the inquisitors belonged to the secular clergy
(priests who were not members of religious orders), and had a university
education. Pay was 60,000 maravedÃ­es at the end of the 15th century, and
250,000 maravedÃ­es at the beginning of the 17th century.[citation needed]

The fiscal was in charge of presenting the accusation, investigating the
denunciations and interrogating the witnesses. The calificadores were
generally theologians; it fell to them to determine if the defendant's conduct
constituted a crime against the faith. Consultants were expert jurists who
advised the court in questions of procedure. The court had, in addition, three
secretaries: the notario de secuestros (Notary of Property), who registered
the goods of the accused at the moment of his detention; the notario del
secreto (Notary of the Secreto), who recorded the testimony of the defendant
and the witnesses; and the escribano general (General Notary), secretary of
the court.

The alguacil was the executive arm of the court: he was responsible for
detaining and jailing the defendant. Other civil employees were the nuncio,
ordered to spread official notices of the court, and the alcaide, jailer in
charge of feeding the prisoners.

In addition to the members of the court, two auxiliary figures existed that
collaborated with the Holy Office: the familiares and the comissarios
(commissioners). Familiares were lay collaborators of the Inquisition, who had
to be permanently at the service of the Holy Office. To become a familiar was
considered an honour, since it was a public recognition of limpieza de sangre
â Old Christian status â and brought with it certain additional
privileges. Although many nobles held the position, most of the familiares
many came from the ranks of commoners. The commissioners, on the other hand,
were members of the religious orders who collaborated occasionally with the
Holy Office.

One of the most striking aspects of the organization of the Inquisition was
its form of financing: devoid its own budget, the Inquisition depended
exclusively on the confiscation of the goods of the denounced. It is not
surprising, therefore, that many of those prosecuted were rich men. That the
situation was open to abuse is evident, as stands out in the memorial that a
converso from Toledo directed to Charles I:

> "Your Majesty must provide, before all else, that the expenses of the Holy
Office do not come from the properties of the condemned, because if that is
the case, if they do not burn they do not eat."[44]

## [edit] Functioning of the inquisition

The Inquisition operated in conformity with Canon Law of the Roman Catholic
Church; its operations were in no way arbitrary. Its procedures were set out
in various Instrucciones issued by the successive Inquisitors General,
Torquemada, Deza, and ValdÃ©s.

### [edit] Accusation

When the Inquisition arrived in a city, the first step was the Edict of Grace.
Following the Sunday mass, the Inquisitor would proceed to read the edict: it
explained possible heresies and encouraged all the congregation to come to the
tribunals of the Inquisition to "relieve their consciences". They were called
Edicts of Grace because all of the self-incriminated who presented themselves
within a period of grace (approximately one month) were offered the
possibility of reconciliation with the Church without severe punishment. The
promise of benevolence was effective, and many voluntarily presented
themselves to the Inquisition. But self-incrimination was not sufficient, one
also had to accuse all one's accomplices. As a result, the Inquisition had an
unending supply of informants. With time, the Edicts of Grace were substituted
by the Edicts of Faith, doing away with the possibility of quick, painless
reconciliation.

The denunciations were anonymous, and the defendant had no way of knowing the
identity of their accusers.[45] This was one of the points most criticized by
those who opposed the Inquisition (for example, the Cortes of Castile, in
1518). In practice, false denunciations were frequent, resulting from envy or
personal resentments. Many denunciations were for absolutely insignificant
reasons. The Inquisition stimulated fear and distrust among neighbours, and
denunciations among relatives were not uncommon.

### [edit] Detention

After a denunciation, the case was examined by the calificadores (qualifiers),
who had to determine if there was heresy involved, followed by detention of
the accused. In practice, however, many were detained in preventive custody,
and many cases of lengthy incarcerations occurred, lasting up to two years,
before the calificadores examined the case.[46]

Detention of the accused entailed the preventive sequestration of their
property by the Inquisition. The property of the prisoner was used to pay for
procedural expenses and the accused's own maintenance and costs. Often the
relatives of the defendant found themselves in outright misery. This situation
was only remedied following instructions written in 1561.

The entire process was undertaken with the utmost secrecy, as much for the
public as for the accused, who were not informed about the accusations that
were levied against them. Months, or even years could pass without the accused
being informed about why they were imprisoned. The prisoners remained
isolated, and, during this time, the prisoners were not allowed to attend mass
nor receive the sacraments. The jails of the Inquisition were no worse than
those of civil society, and there are even certain testimonies that
occasionally they were much better.[citation needed] Some prisoners died in
prison, as was frequent at the time.

### [edit] The trial

The inquisitorial process consisted of a series of hearings, in which both the
denouncers and the defendant gave testimony. A defense counsel was assigned to
the defendant, a member of the tribunal itself, whose role was simply to
advise the defendant and to encourage them to speak the truth. The prosecution
was directed by the fiscal. Interrogation of the defendant was done in the
presence of the Notary of the Secreto, who meticulously wrote down the words
of the accused. The archives of the Inquisition, in comparison to those of
other judicial systems of the era, are striking in the completeness of their
documentation. In order to defend themselves, the accused had two
possibilities: abonos (to find favourable witnesses) or tachas (to demonstrate
that the witnesses of accusers were not trustworthy).

In order to interrogate the accused, the Inquisition made use of torture, but
not in a systematic way. It was applied mainly against those suspected of
Judaism and Protestantism, beginning in the 16th century. For example, Lea
estimates that between 1575 and 1610 the court of Toledo tortured
approximately a third of those processed for heresy.[47] In other periods, the
proportions varied remarkably. Torture was always a means to obtain the
confession of the accused, not a punishment itself. It was applied without
distinction of sex or age, including children and the aged.

The methods of torture most used by the Inquisition were garrucha, toca and
the potro. The application of the garrucha, also known as the strappado,
consisted of suspending the victim from the ceiling by a pulley with weights
tied to the ankles, with a series of lifts and drops, during which arms and
legs suffered violent pulls and were sometimes dislocated.[48] The toca, also
called tortura del agua, consisted of introducing a cloth into the mouth of
the victim, and forcing them to ingest water spilled from a jar so that they
had impression of drowning (see: waterboarding).[49] The potro, the rack, was
the instrument of torture used most frequently.[50]

The assertion that "confessionem esse veram, non factam vi tormentorum" (the
confession was true and free) sometimes follows a description of how,
presently after torture ended, the subject freely confessed to the
offenses.[51]

Some of the torture methods attributed to the Spanish Inquisition were never
used. For example, the "Iron Maiden" never existed in Spain, and was a post-
Reformation invention of Germany. Thumbscrews on display in an English museum
as Spanish were recently argued to be of English origin.

Once the process concluded, the inquisidores met with a representative of the
bishop and with the consultores, experts in theology or Canon Law, which was
called the consulta de fe. The case was voted and sentence pronounced, which
had to be unanimous. In case of discrepancies, the Suprema had to be informed.

### [edit] Sentencing

The results of the trial could be the following:

  1. The defendant could be acquitted. In actual practice, acquittals were very rare.
  2. The process could be suspended, in which the defendant went free, although under suspicion, and with the threat that the process could be continued at any time. Suspension was a form of acquittal without admitting specifically that the accusation had been erroneous.
  3. The defendant could be penanced. Considered guilty, they had to abjure publicly their crimes (de levi if it was a misdemeanor, and de vehementi if the crime were serious), and was condemned to punishment. Among these were the sambenito, exile, fines or even sentence to the galleys.
  4. The defendant could be reconciled. In addition to the public ceremony in which the condemned was reconciled with the Catholic Church, more severe punishments existed, among them long sentences to jail or the galleys, and the confiscation of all property. Also physical punishments existed, such as whipping.
  5. The most serious punishment was relaxation to the secular arm, which implied burning at the stake. This penalty was frequently applied to impenitent heretics and those who had relapsed. Execution was public. If the condemned repented, they were garroted before the body was given to the flames. If not, they were burned alive.

Frequently, cases were judged in absentia, and when the accused died before
the trial finished, the condemned were burned in effigy.

The distribution of the punishments varied much over time. It is believed that
sentences of death were frequent mainly in the first stage of the history of
the Inquisition (according to GarcÃ­a CÃ¡rcel, the court of Valencia employed
the death penalty in 40% of the processings before 1530, but later that
percentage lowered to 3%).[52]

### [edit] The Autos de Fe

For more details on this topic, see Auto de fe.

If the sentence was condemnatory, this implied that the condemned had to
participate in the ceremony of an auto de fe, that solemnized their return to
the Church (in most cases), or punishment as an impenitent heretic. The autos
de fe could be private (auto particular) or public (auto publico or auto
general).

Although initially the public autos did not have any special solemnity nor
sought a large attendance of spectators, with time they became solemn
ceremonies, celebrated with large public crowds, amidst a festive atmosphere.
The auto de fe eventually became a baroque spectacle, with staging
meticulously calculated to cause the greatest effect among the spectators.

The autos were conducted in a large public space (in the largest plaza of the
city, frequently), generally on holidays. The rituals related to the auto
began the previous night (the "procession of the Green Cross") and sometimes
lasted the whole day. The auto de fe frequently was taken to the canvas by
painters: one of the better known examples is the painting by Francesco Rizzi
held by the Prado Museum in Madrid and which represents the auto celebrated in
the Plaza Mayor of Madrid on June 30, 1680. The last public auto de fe took
place in 1691.

The auto de fe involved: a Catholic Mass; prayer; a public procession of those
found guilty; and a reading of their sentences (Peters 1988: 93-94). They took
place in public squares or esplanades and lasted several hours: ecclesiastical
and civil authorities attended.[2] Artistic representations of the auto de fe
usually depict torture and the burning at the stake. However, this type of
activity never took place during an auto de fe, which was in essence a
religious act. Torture was not administered after a trial concluded, and
executions were always held after and separate from the auto de fe (Kamen
1997: 192-213), though in the minds and experiences of observers and those
undergoing the confession and execution, the separation of the two might be
experienced as merely a technicality.

The first recorded auto de fe was held in Paris in 1242, under the great Louis
IX (Stavans 2005:xxxiv) The first Spanish auto de fe took place in Seville,
Spain, in 1481; six of the men and women that participated in this first
religious ritual were later executed. The Inquisition enjoyed limited power in
Portugal, having been established in 1536 and officially lasting until 1821,
although its influence was much weakened with the government of the Marquis of
Pombal, in the second half of the 18th century. Autos de fe also took place in
Mexico, Brazil and Peru: contemporary historians of the Conquistadors such as
Bernal DÃ­az del Castillo record them. They also occurred in the Portuguese
colony of Goa, India, following the establishment of Inquisition there in
1562-1563.

The arrival of the Enlightenment in Spain slowed inquisitorial activity. In
the first half of the 18th century, 111 were condemned to be burned in person,
and 117 in effigy, most of them for judaizing. In the reign of Philip V, there
were 728 autos de fe, while in the reigns of Charles III and Charles IV only
four condemned were burned.

With the Century of Lights, the Inquisition changed: Enlightenment ideas were
the closest threat that had to be fought. The main figures of the Spanish
Enlightenment were in favour of the abolition of the Inquisition, and many
were processed by the Holy Office, among them Olavide, in 1776; Iriarte, in
1779; and Jovellanos, in 1796. The latter sent a report to Charles IV in which
he indicated the inefficiency of the Inquisition's courts and the ignorance of
those who operated them:

> friars who take [the position] only to obtain gossip and exemption from
choir; who are ignorant of foreign languages, who only know a little
scholastic theology...[53]

In its new role, the Inquisition tried to accentuate its function of censoring
publications, but found that Charles III had secularized censorship procedures
and, on many occasions, the authorization of the Council of Castile hit the
more intransigent position of the Inquisition. Since the Inquisition itself
was an arm of the state, being within the Council of Castile, it was generally
civil censorship and not ecclesiastic that ended up prevailing. This loss of
influence can also be explained because the foreign Enlightenment texts
entered the peninsula through prominent members of the nobility or
government,[54] influential people with whom it was very difficult to
interfere. Thus, for example, Diderot's Encyclopedia entered Spain thanks to
special licenses granted by the king.

However, with the coming of the French Revolution, the Council of Castile,
fearing that revolutionary ideas would penetrate Spain's borders, decided to
reactivate the Holy Office that was directly charged with the persecution of
French works. An Inquisition edict of December 1789, that received the full
approval of Charles IV and Floridablanca, stated that:

> having news that several books have been scattered and promoted in these
kingdoms... that, without being contented with the simple narration events of
a seditious nature... seem to form a theoretical and practical code of
independence from the legitimate powers.... destroying in this way the
political and social order... the reading of thirty and nine French works is
prohibited, under fine...[55]

However, inquisitorial activity was impossible in the face of the information
avalanche that crossed the border, seeing in 1792 that,

> the multitude of seditious papers... does not allow formalizing the files
against those who introduce them...

The fight from within against the Inquisition almost always took place in
clandestine form. The first texts that questioned the inquisitorial role and
praised the ideas of Voltaire or Montesquieu appeared in 1759. After the
suspension of pre-publication censorship on the part of the Council of Castile
in 1785, the newspaper El Censor began the publication of protests against the
activities of the Holy Office by means of a rationalist critique and, even,
Valentin de Foronda published EspÃ­ritu de los Mejores Diarios, a plea in
favour of freedom of expression that was avidly read in the salons. Also,
Manuel de Aguirre, in the same vein, wrote, On Toleration in El Censor, El
Correo de los Ciegos and El Diario de Madrid.[56]

## [edit] End of the Inquisition

During the reign of Charles IV, in spite of the fears that the French
Revolution provoked, several events took place that accentuated the decline of
the Inquisition. In the first place, the state stopped being a mere social
organizer and began to worry about the well-being of the public. As a result,
they considered the land-holding power of the Church, in the seÃ±orÃ­os and,
more generally, in the accumulated wealth that had prevented social
progress.[57] On the other hand, the perennial struggle between the power of
the throne and the power of the Church, inclined more and more to the former,
under which, Enlightenment thinkers found better protection for their ideas.
Manuel Godoy and Antonio AlcalÃ¡ Galiano were openly hostile to an institution
whose only role had been reduced to censorship and was the very embodiment of
the Spanish Black Legend, internationally, and was not suitable to the
political interests of the moment:

> The Inquisition? Its old power no longer exists: the horrible authority that
this bloodthirsty court had exerted in other times was reduced... the Holy
Office had come to be a species of commission for book censorship, nothing
more...[58]

In fact, prohibited works circulated freely in the public bookstores of
Seville, Salamanca or Valladolid.

The Inquisition was abolished during the domination of Napoleon and the reign
of Joseph I (1808â1812). In 1813, the liberal deputies of the Cortes of
CÃ¡diz also obtained its abolition[59], largely as a result of the Holy
Office's condemnation of the popular revolt against French invasion. But the
Inquisition was reconstituted when Ferdinand VII recovered the throne on July
1, 1814. It was again abolished during the three year Liberal interlude known
as the Trienio liberal. Later, during the period known as the Ominous Decade,
the Inquisition was not formally re-established,[60] although, de facto, it
returned under the so-called Meetings of Faith, tolerated in the dioceses by
King Ferdinand. These had the dubious honour of executing the last heretic
condemned, the school teacher Cayetano Ripoll, garroted in Valencia on July 26
1826 (presumably for having taught deist principles), all amongst a European-
wide scandal at the despotic attitude still prevailing in Spain. Juan Antonio
Llorente, who had been the Inquisition's general secretary in 1789, became a
Bonapartist and published a critical history in 1817 from his French exile,
based on his privileged access to its archives.

The Inquisition was definitively abolished on July 15, 1834, by a Royal Decree
signed by regent Maria Cristina de Borbon, a liberal queen, during the
minority of Isabel II and with the approval of the President of the Cabinet
Francisco MartÃ­nez de la Rosa. (It is possible that something similar to the
Inquisition acted during the First Carlist War, in the zones dominated by the
Carlists, since one of the government measures praised by Conde de Molina
Carlos Maria Isidro de Borbon was the re-implementation of the Inquisition to
protect the Church). During the Carlist Wars it was the conservatives who
fought the progresists who wanted to reduce the Church's power amongst other
reforms to liberalise the economy.

## [edit] Death tolls

The historian Hernando del Pulgar, contemporary of Ferdinand and Isabella,
estimated that the Inquisition had burned at the stake 2,000 people and
reconciled another 15,000 by 1490 (just one decade after the Inquisition
began).[61]

Modern historians have begun to study the documentary records of the
Inquisition. The archives of the Suprema, today held by the National
Historical Archive of Spain (Archivo HistÃ³rico Nacional), conserves the
annual relations of all processes between 1540 and 1700. This material
provides information about 44,674 judgements, the latter studied by Gustav
Henningsen and Jaime Contreras. These 44,674 cases include 826 executions in
persona and 778 in effigie. This material, however, is far from being complete
- for example, the tribunal of Cuenca is entirely omitted, because no
relaciones de causas from this tribunal has been found, and significant gaps
concern some other tribunals (e.g. Valladolid). Many more cases not reported
to Suprema are known from the other sources (e.g. no relaciones de causas from
Cuenca has been found, but its original records has been preserved), but were
not included in Contreras-Hennigsen's statistics for the methodological
reasons.[62] William Monter estimates 1000 executions between 1530-1630 and
250 between 1630-1730.[63]

The archives of the Suprema only provide information surrounding the processes
prior to 1560. To study the processes themselves, it is necessary to examine
the archives of the local tribunals; however, the majority have been lost to
the devastation of war, the ravages of time or other events. Pierre Dedieu has
studied those of Toledo, where 12,000 were judged for offences related to
heresy.[64] Ricardo GarcÃ­a CÃ¡rcel has analyzed those of the tribunal of
Valencia.[65] These authors' investigations find that the Inquisition was most
active in the period between 1480 and 1530, and that during this period the
percentage condemned to death was much more significant than in the years
studied by Henningsen and Contreras. Henry Kamen gives the number of about
2,000 executions in persona in the whole Spain up to 1530.[66]

GarcÃ­a CÃ¡rcel estimates that the total number processed by the Inquisition
throughout its history was approximately 150,000. Applying the percentages of
executions that appeared in the trials of 1560-1700âabout 2%âthe
approximate total would be about 3,000 put to death. Nevertheless, very
probably this total should be raised keeping in mind the data provided by
Dedieu and GarcÃ­a CÃ¡rcel for the tribunals of Toledo and Valencia,
respectively. It is likely that the total would be between 3,000 and 5,000
executed.

However, it is impossible to determine the precision of this total, and owing
to the gaps in documentation, it is unlikely that the exact number will ever
be known.

## [edit] Henningsen-Contreras statistics for the period 1540-1700

Tribunal Number of preserved relaciones de causas from the period
1540-1700[67] Number of trials in causa fidei reported in the preserved
relaciones de causas[68] Estimated number of all cases in the period
1540-1700[69] Executions in persona reported in the preserved relaciones de
causas[70] The actual number of executions in persona in the period
1540-1700[71]  
Barcelona 94 3047 ~5000 37 53[72]  
Navarre 130 4296 ~5200 85 90[72]  
Majorca 96 1260 ~2100 37 38[73]  
Sardinia 49 767 ~2700 8 8  
Saragossa 126 5967 ~7600 200 250[72]  
Sicily 101 3188 ~6400 25 52[72]  
Valencia 128 4540 ~5700 78 93[72]  
Cartagena (established 1610) 62 699 ~1100 3 3  
Lima (established 1570) 92 1176 ~2200 30 31[74]  
Mexico (established 1570) 52 950 ~2400 17 38[75]  
Aragonese Secretariat (total) 930 25890 ~40000 520 656  
Canaries 66 695 ~1500 1 3[76]  
Cordoba 28 883 ~5000 8 13 in the period 1570-1625[77]  
Cuenca 0 0 ~4700 0 At least 23[78]  
Galicia (established 1560) 83 2203 ~2700 19 19  
Granada 79 4157 ~8100 33 38 in the period 1560-1625[79]  
Llerena 84 2851 ~5200 47 47  
Murcia 66 1735 ~4300 56 111 in the period 1558-1625[80]  
Seville 58 1962 ~6700 96 98[81]  
Toledo 108 3740 ~5500 40 40  
Valladolid 29 558 ~3000 6 At least 32[82]  
Castilian Secretariat (total) 601 18784 ~47000 306 At least 424  
Total 1531 44674 ~87000 826 At least 1080  
## [edit] Historiography

How historians and commentators have viewed the Spanish Inquisition has
changed over time, and continues to be a source of controversy to this day.
Before and during the 19th century historical interest focused on who was
being persecuted. In the early and mid 20th century historians examined the
specifics of what happened and how it influenced Spanish history. In the later
20th and 21st century, historians have re-examined how severe the Inquisition
really was, calling into question some of the conclusions made earlier in the
20th century.

### [edit] The Spanish "Black Legend"

Main article: Black Legend

In the mid-16th century, coincident with the persecution of the Protestants,
there began to appear from the pens of various European Protestant
intellectuals, an image of the Inquisition that exaggerated its negative
aspects for propaganda purposes. One of the first to write about this theme
was the Englishman John Foxe (1516â1587), who dedicated an entire chapter of
his book The Book of Martyrs to the Spanish Inquisition. Other sources of the
Black Legend of the Inquisition were the Sanctae Inquisitionis Hispanicae
Artes, authored under the pseudonym of Reginaldus Gonzalvus Montanus (possibly
an allusion to the German astronomer Regiomontanus), that was probably written
by two exiled Spanish Protestants, Casiodoro de Reina and Antonio del Corro.
The book saw great success, and was translated into English, French, Dutch,
German and Hungarian and contributed to cementing the negative image that the
Inquisition had in Europe. The Dutch and English, political rivals of Spain,
also built on the Black Legend.

Other sources for the Black Legend of the Inquisition come from Italy.
Ferdinand's efforts to export the Spanish Inquisition to Naples provoked many
revolts, and even as late as 1547 and 1564 there were anti-Spanish uprisings
when it was believed that the Inquisition would be established. In Sicily,
where the Inquisition was established, there were also revolts against the
activity of the Holy Office, in 1511 and 1516. Many Italian authors of the
16th century referred with horror to the actions of the Inquisition.

### [edit] Professional historians

Before the rise of professional historians in the 19th century, the Spanish
Inquisition had largely been studied and portrayed by Protestant scholars who
saw it as the archetypal symbol of Catholic intolerance and ecclesiastical
power.[83] The Spanish Inquisition for them was largely associated with the
persecution of Protestants.[83] The 19th century professional historians,
including the Spanish scholar Amador de los Rios, were the first to challenge
this perception and look seriously at the role of Jews and Muslims.[83]

At the start of the 20th century Henry Charles Lea published the
groundbreaking History of the Inquisition in Spain. This influential work saw
the Spanish Inquisition as "an engine of immense power, constantly applied for
the furtherance of obscurantism, the repression of thought, the exclusion of
foreign ideas and the obstruction of progress."[83] Lea documented the
Inquisition's methods and modes of operation in no uncertain terms calling it
"theocratic absolutism" at its worst.[83] In the context of the polarization
between Protestants and Catholics during the second half of the nineteenth
century[84], some of Lea's contemporaries, as well as most modern scholars
thought Lea's work had an anti-Catholic bias.[84] [85] William H. Prescott,
the Boston historian, likened the Inquisition to an "eye that never
slumbered".

Starting in the 1920s, Jewish scholars picked up where Lea's work left
off.[83] Yitzhak Baer's History of the Jews in Christian Spain, Cecil Roth's
History of the Marranos and, after World War II, the work of Haim Beinart who
for the first time published trial transcripts of cases involving conversos.

### [edit] Modern Scholarship

Main article: Historical revision of the Inquisition

One of the first books to challenge the classical view was The Spanish
Inquisition (1965) by Henry Kamen. Kamen established that the Inquisition was
not nearly as cruel or as powerful as commonly believed. The book was very
influential and largely responsible for subsequent studies in the 1970s to try
to quantify (from archival records) the Inquisition's activities from 1480 to
1834.[86] Those studies showed there was an initial burst of activity against
conversos suspected of relapsing into Judaism, and a mid-16th-century pursuit
of Protestants - but the Inquisition served principally as a forum Spaniards
occasionally used to humiliate and punish people they did not like:
blasphemers, bigamists, foreigners and, in Aragon, homosexuals and horse
smugglers.[83] There were so few Protestants in Spain that widespread
persecution of Protestantism was not physically possible.[citation needed]
Kamen went on to publish two more books in 1985 and 2006 that incorporated new
findings, further supporting the view that the Inquisition was not as bad as
once described by Lea and others. Along similar lines is Edward Peters's
Inquisition (1988).

## [edit] The Spanish Inquisition in the Arts

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Tribunal of the Inquisition as illustrated by Francisco de Goya

### [edit] Literature

  * The literature of the 18th century approaches the theme of the Inquisition from a critical point of view. In Candide by Voltaire, the Inquisition appears as the epitome of intolerance and arbitrary justice in Portugal and America.
  * During the Romantic Period, the gothic novel, which was primarily a genre developed in Protestant countries, frequently associated Catholicism with terror and repression. This vision of the Spanish Inquisition appears in, among other work, The Monk (1796) by Matthew Gregory Lewis (set in Madrid during the Inquisition, but can be seen as commenting on the French Revolution and the Terror); in Melmoth the Wanderer (1820) by Charles Robert Maturin and in The Manuscript Found in Saragossa by Polish author Jan Potocki.
  * Samuel Shellabarger's Captain from Castile deals directly with the Spanish Inquisition during the first part of the novel.
  * One of the best known stories of Edgar Allan Poe, The Pit and the Pendulum, explores along the same lines the use of torture by the Inquisition. The types of torture that appear in the story have no basis in history, however.
  * In France, in the early 19th century, the epistolary novel Cornelia Bororquia, or the Victim of the Inquisition, which has been attributed to Spaniard Luiz GutiÃ©rrez, ferociously criticizes the Inquisition and its representatives.
  * The Inquisition also appears in one of the chapters of the novel The Brothers Karamazov (1880) by Fyodor Dostoevsky, which imagines an encounter between Jesus and the Inquisitor General.
  * Small Gods, (1992) one of the Discworld Novels by Terry Pratchett centres around a small country - Omnia - in which all the inhabitants are (nominally) followers of the "Great God Om". One of the ways to ensure that all Omnians follow the words of the Omnian prophets, is a torture body, known as the Quisition, whose methods are reminiscent of those ascribed to the Spanish Inquisition.
  * Carme Riera's novella, published in 1994, Dins el Darrer Blau (In the Last Blue) is set during the repression of the chuetas (conversos from Majorca) at the end of the 17th century.
  * In 1998, the Spanish writer Miguel Delibes published the historical novel The Heretic, about the Protestants of Valladolid and their repression by the Inquisition.
  * The Captain Alatriste novels by the Spanish writer Arturo PÃ©rez-Reverte are set in the early seventeenth century. The second novel, Purity of Blood, has the narrator being tortured by the Inquisition and describes an Auto-da-fe.
  * The Argentine Author, Marcos Aguinis, produced a work titled "La Gesta del Marrano", which portrays the length of the Inquisition's arm to reach people in Argentina during the 16th and 17th centuries.
  * The Marvel Comics series Marvel 1602 shows the Inquisition targeting Mutants for "blasphemy". The character Magneto (comics) also appears as the Grand Inquisitor.
  * The mature audience manga Berserk features, in volumes 17-21,a priest named Mozgus who, with the assistance of dedicated "inquisitors", brutally tortures and executes hundreds of Pagans in a thematic combination of the Spanish Inquisition and the witchhunts.
  * Incantation novel by Alice Hoffman. A young adult fiction based on the Spanish Inquisition. Story told by Estrella deMadrigal as she lives with her conversos family in Spain.

### [edit] Film

  * The 1947 epic Captain from Castile by Darryl F. Zanuck, staring Tyrone Power, uses The Inquisition as the major plot of the film. It tells how powerful families used its evils to ruin their rivals. The first part of the film shows this and the reach of the Inquisition reoccurs throughout this movie following Pedro De Vargas (Power) even to the 'New World'.
  * Edgar Allan Poe's The Pit and the Pendulum has been brought to the screen many times. Perhaps best known is the version by Roger Corman in 1961. However, the film has much less to do with the Inquisition than the original story.
  * The Inquisition captures the main character in the 1965 Polish film Rekopis Znaleziony w Saragossie (The Saragossa Manuscript).
  * In both the stage and film versions of the musical play Man of La Mancha, Miguel de Cervantes is arrested by the Spanish Inquisition and thrown into a dungeon, in which he and the other prisoners perform the story of Don Quixote. At the end of the musical, he and his manservant are escorted by the Inquisition to their trial.
  * The Spanish Inquisition segment of the 1981 Mel Brooks movie The History of the World Part 1 is a comedic musical performance based on the activities of the first Inquisitor General of Spain, TomÃ¡s de Torquemada.
  * The film Akelarre (1984) by Pedro Olea, deals with the trials in LogroÃ±o of the Witches of Zugarramurdi in Navarre.
  * The beginning of the film 1492: Conquest of Paradise (1992) by Ridley Scott speaks of the fear induced by the Spanish Inquisition and shows several aspects of the relaxation to the secular arm.
  * In the 1998 film Dangerous Beauty, real-life poetess and courtesan Veronica Franco and her lover are captured by the Spanish Inquisition.
  * The film The Fountain (2006) by Darren Aronofsky, features the Spanish Inquisition as part of a plot in 1500 when the Grand Inquisitor threatens Queen Isabella's life.
  * Goya's Ghosts (2006) by Milos Forman is set in Spain between 1792 and 1809 and focuses realistically on the role of the Inquisition and its end under Napoleon's rule.
  * The Inquisition is satirized in Mel Brooks' "History of the World, Part I"
  * The film Day of Wrath (2006) is set in 16th century Spain at the height of the Inquisition's persecution of the hidden Jews. The plot reveals that the Grand Inquisitor himself is a Jew.

### [edit] Theatre, music, and television

  * The Grand Inquisitor of Spain plays a part in Don Carlos, (1867) a play by Friedrich Schiller (which was the basis for the opera in five acts by Giuseppe Verdi, in which the Inquisitor is also featured, and the third act is dedicated to an Auto-da-fÃ©).
  * In the Monty Python comedy team's Spanish Inquisition sketch, an inept Inquisition repeatedly burst unexpectedly into scenes after someone utters the words "I didn't expect a kind of Spanish Inquisition", screaming "Nobody expects the Spanish Inquisition!" The Inquisition would then use ineffectual forms of torture, including a dish-drying rack, soft cushions and a comfy chair.
  * The Histeria! episode "Megalomaniacs!" featured a game show sketch based on the Spanish Inquisition titled "Convert or Die!" The sketch was later banned from the episode and replaced with a new sketch about Custer's Last Stand in re-runs due to complaints from the Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights that the sketch was teaching kids to reject Catholicism. However, it was restored when the episode was broadcast on In2TV.
  * The musical Man of La Mancha (1965) is set in a dungeon where Miguel de Cervantes awaits a hearing with the Spanish Inquisition.
  * The song "Sign of the Cross", by the British heavy metal band Iron Maiden is said to be about the Spanish Inquisition, and how God still protected the people who were involved in the Inquisition, despite their sins against him.
  * The band Dimmu Borgir's 2007 album, In Sorte Diaboli, follows the path of a priest's assistant as he reverses his ways and is ultimately burned at the stake during the Spanish Inquisition.
  * The Opera "Prigioniero" by Luigi Dallapiccola, tells the story of a man captured in the inquisition, and befriends a guard, who turns out to be the grand inquisitor.

### [edit] Other

  * In the Video Game Eternal Darkness, one of the chapters takes place in a cathedral during the Spanish Inquisition.

## [edit] In Language

Holding Someone's feet to the fire:  
Torture with a view to the confession for heresy. The target was positioned in
a manner that allowed the inquisitor to apply flames to the feet & lower body
of the accused. This was often done until the accused confessed or died.

## [edit] See also

  * Black Legend
  * Cardinal Ximenes
  * Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith
  * Execution by burning
  * Goa Inquisition
  * List of Grand Inquisitors of Spain
  * Historical persecution by Christians
  * Historical revision of the Inquisition
  * History of the Jews in Spain
  * Medieval Inquisition
  * Mexican Inquisition
  * Peruvian Inquisition
  * Portuguese Inquisition
  * Roman Inquisition
  * The Spanish Inquisition (Monty Python)

## [edit] References and footnotes

  1. ^ http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juder%C3%ADa
  2. ^ Kamen, Henry, The Spanish Inquisition, p. 17. Kamen cites approximate numbers for Valencia (250) and Barcelona (400), but no solid data about Cordoba.
  3. ^ Notably Bishop Pablo de Santa Maria, author of Scrutinium Scripturarum, Jeronimo de Santa Fe (Hebraomastix) and Pedro de la Caballeria (Zelus Christi contra Judaeos). All three were conversos. (Kamen, op. cit., p.39)
  4. ^ Notably the Libro verde de Aragon and TizÃ³n de la nobleza de EspaÃ±a (cited in Kamen, op. cit. p. 38.
  5. ^ The terms converso and crypto-Jew are somewhat vexed, and occasionally historians are not clear on how, precisely, they are intended to be understood. For the purpose of clarity, in this article converso will be taken to mean one who has sincerely renounced Judaism or Islam and embraced Catholicism. Crypto-Jew will be taken to mean one who accepts Christian baptism, yet continues to practice Judaism.
  6. ^ Cited in Kamen, op. cit., p. 49.
  7. ^ Kamen, The Spanish Inquisition op. cit., p. 49-50
  8. ^ Kamen, The Spanish Inquisition op. cit., p. 157
  9. ^ Kamen, op. cit., p. 60.
  10. ^ Kamen, op. cit., pp. 29-31.
  11. ^ Kamen, op. cit. p. 24.
  12. ^ S.P. Scott: History;Vol II, op cit;p.259
  13. ^ Kamen, op. cit. p. 217
  14. ^ Kamen, op. cit. p. 225
  15. ^ H.C. Lea: The Moriscos of Spain; op cit; p.308
  16. ^ H.C. Lea: The Moriscos of Spain; op cit; p.345
  17. ^ H.C. Lea: The Moriscos of Spain; op cit; p.375
  18. ^ http://www.cell.com/AJHG/abstract/S0002-9297%2808%2900592-2 The Genetic Legacy of Religious Diversity and Intolerance: Paternal Lineages of Christians, Jews, and Muslims in the Iberian Peninsula], Adams et al. 2008
  19. ^ http://www.nature.com/ejhg/journal/v12/n10/full/5201225a.html
  20. ^ http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12627534?dopt=Abstract
  21. ^ http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/klu/439/2004/00000115/00000005/art00001
  22. ^ http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16500815?dopt=Abstract
  23. ^ http://www.cell.com/AJHG/retrieve/pii/S0002929708005478
  24. ^ "Despite alternative possible sources for lineages ascribed a Sephardic Jewish origin", [1]
  25. ^ "La cifra de los sefardÃ­es puede estar sobreestimada, ya que en estos genes hay mucha diversidad y quizÃ¡ absorbieron otros genes de Oriente Medio" ("The Sephardic result may be overestimated, since there is much diversity in those genes and maybe absorbed other genes from the Middle East"). Â¿Pone en duda Calafell la validez de los tests de ancestros? âEstÃ¡n bien para los americanos, nosotros ya sabemos de dÃ³nde venimosâ (Puts Calafell in doubt the validity of ancestry tests? "They can be good for the Americans, we already know from where we come from). " [2]
  26. ^ âWe think it might be an over estimate" "The genetic makeup of Sephardic Jews is probably common to other Middle Eastern populations, such as the Phoenicians, that also settled the Iberian Peninsula, Calafell says. âIn our study, that would have all fallen under the Jewish label.ââ http://www.sciencenews.org/view/generic/id/39056/title/Spanish_Inquisition_couldn%E2%80%99t_quash_Moorish,_Jewish_genes
  27. ^ "El doctor Calafell matiza que (...) los marcadores genÃ©ticos usados para distinguir a la poblaciÃ³n con ancestros sefardÃ­es pueden producir distorsiones". "ese 20% de espaÃ±oles que el estudio seÃ±ala como descendientes de sefardÃ­es podrÃ­an haber heredado ese rasgo de movimiento mÃ¡s antiguos, como el de los fenicios o, incluso, primeros pobladores neolÃ­ticos hace miles de aÃ±os." "Dr. Calafell clarifies that (...) the genetic markers used to distinguish the population with Sephardim ancestry may produce distorsions. The 20% of Spaniards that are identified as having Sephardim ancestry in the study could have inherited that same marker from older movements like the Phoenicians, or even the first Neolithic settlers thousands of years ago" http://www.elmundo.es/elmundo/2008/12/04/ciencia/1228409780.html
  28. ^ Spanish Inquisition left genetic legacy in Iberia , New Scientist, December 4, 2008
  29. ^ http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/full/21/7/1361/T03
  30. ^ http://www.nature.com/ejhg/journal/vaop/ncurrent/abs/ejhg2008258a.html
  31. ^ The Cortes of Castile asked the king to reform the inquisitorial process no fewer than four times, in 1518, 1520, 1523 and 1525. The Cortes of Aragon at least in 1518. (Kamen, The Inquisition: An Historical Revision, pp. 78-81).
  32. ^ Kamen p. 98
  33. ^ These trials, specifically those of Valladolid, form the basis of the plot of "The Heritic: A novel of the Inquisition" by Miguel Delibes (Overlook: 2006)
  34. ^ Kamen, (op. cit. p. 99) gives the figure of about 100 executions between 1559 and 1566. He compares these figures with those condemned to death in other European countries during the same period, concluding that in similar periods England, under Mary Tudor, executed about twice as many for heresy: in France, three times the number, and ten times as many in the Low Countries.
  35. ^ Kamen, op. cit., pp. 99-100.
  36. ^ These trials are the theme of the film Akelarre, by the Spanish director Pedro Olea
  37. ^ Cited in Kamen, op. cit., p. 264.
  38. ^ Kamen, op. cit., p. 259.
  39. ^ a b William R. Denslow, Harry S. Truman: 10,000 Famous Freemasons, ISBN 1-4179-7579-2
  40. ^ GarcÃ­a CÃ¡rcel, Ricardo: La InquisiciÃ³n, p. 21.
  41. ^ Kamen, op. cit., p. 141.
  42. ^ In Sicily, the Inquisition functioned until March 30, 1782, when it was abolished by King Ferdinand IV of Naples. It is estimated that 200 people were executed during this period.
  43. ^ GarcÃ­a CÃ¡rcel, Ricardo, op.cit., p. 24.
  44. ^ Cited in Kamen, op. cit., p. 151.
  45. ^ Though over the course of the trial, their identities likely became apparent.
  46. ^ "In the tribunal of Valladolid, in 1699, various suspects (including a girl of 9 and a boy of 14) were jailed for up to two years with having had the least evaluation of the accusations presented against them" (Kamen, op. cit., p. 180)
  47. ^ H. C. Lea, III, p 33, Cited in Kamen, op. cit, p. 185. GarcÃ­a CÃ¡rcel, op. cit. p. 43 finds the same statistics.
  48. ^ Sabatini, Rafael, Torquemada and the Spanish Inquisition: A History, p.190, Kessinger Publishing (2003), ISBN 0-7661-3161-0
  49. ^ Scott, George Ryley, The History of Torture Throughout the Ages, p.172, Columbia University Press (2003) ISBN 0-7103-0837-X
  50. ^ Carrol. James, Constantine's Sword: The Church and the Jews: A History , p. 356, Houghton Mifflin Books (2002), ISBN 0-618-21908-0
  51. ^ by Peters, Edward, Inquisition, Dissent, Heterodoxy and the Medieval Inquisitional Office, p.65, University of California Press (1989), ISBN 0-520-06630-8
  52. ^ GarcÃ­a CÃ¡rcel, op. cit., p. 39
  53. ^ Cited in Elorza, La InquisiciÃ³n y el pensamiento ilustrado. Historia 16. Especial 10Âº Aniversario La InquisiciÃ³n; p. 81.
  54. ^ Members of the government and the Council of Castile, as well as other members close to the court, obtained special authorization for books purchased in France, the Low Countries or Germany to cross the border without inspection by members of the Holy Office. This practice grew beginning with the reign of Charles III
  55. ^ Elorza, La InquisiciÃ³n y el pensamiento ilustrado. p. 84
  56. ^ The argument presented in the periodicals and other works circulating in Spain were virtually exact copies of the reflections of Montesquieu or Rousseau, translated into Spanish.
  57. ^ Church properties, in general, and those of the Holy Office in particular, occupied large tracts of today's Castile and Leon, Extremadura and Andalucia. The properties were given under feudal terms to farmers or to localities who used them as community property with many restrictions, owing a part of the rent, generally in cash, to the church.
  58. ^ Elorza, La InquisiciÃ³n y el Pensamiento Ilustrado. Historia 16. Especial 10Âº Aniversario La InquisiciÃ³n; p. 88.
  59. ^ See Antonio Puigblanch, La InquisiciÃ³n sin mÃ¡scara, CÃ¡diz, 1811-1813.
  60. ^ Historians have different interpretations. One argument is that during the Ominous Decade, the Inquisition was re-established, but the Royal Decree that would have abolished the order of the Trienio Liberal was never approved, or at least, never published. The formal abolition under the regency of Maria Cristina was thus nothing more than a ratification of the abolition of 1820.
  61. ^ Cited in Kamen op. cit., p. 62.
  62. ^ For full account see: Gustav Henningsen, The Database of the Spanish Inquisition. The relaciones de causas project revisited, in: Heinz Mohnhaupt, Dieter Simon, VortrÃ¤ge zur Justizforschung, Vittorio Klostermann, 1992, pp. 43-85
  63. ^ W. Monter, Frontiers of Heresy: The Spanish Inquisition from the Basque Lands to Sicily, Cambridge 2003, p. 53
  64. ^ Jean-Pierre Dedieu, Los Cuatro Tiempos, in BartolomÃ© Benassar, InquisiciÃ³n EspaÃ±ola: poder polÃ­tico y control social, pp. 15-39.
  65. ^ Ricardo GarcÃ­a CÃ¡rcel, OrÃ­genes de la InquisiciÃ³n EspaÃ±ola. El Tribunal de Valencia, 1478-1530. Barcelona, 1976.
  66. ^ H. Kamen, Inkwizycja HiszpaÅska, Warszawa 2005, p. 62; and H. Rawlings, The Spanish Inquisition, Blackwell Publishing 2004, p. 15
  67. ^ Henningsen, The Database of the Spanish Inquisition, p. 84.
  68. ^ Henningsen, The Database of the Spanish Inquisition, p. 58. These numbers do not include the cases other than in causa fidei (see note below).
  69. ^ Henningsen, The Database of the Spanish Inquisition, p. 84. These Numbers (in the table given in approximation) include all cases tried by inquisition, not only in causa fidei but also concerning minor offences (usually tried ad hoc during visitations, without consultations with Suprema), limpieza de sangre or the offences of inquisitorial familiars, as well as the suspended cases.
  70. ^ Henningsen, The Database of the Spanish Inquisition, p. 58
  71. ^ Data for the Aragonese Secretariat are probably complete, some small lacunae may concern only Valencia and possibly Sardinia, but the numbers for Castilian Secretariat - except Canaries and perhaps Galicia - should be considered as minimal due to gaps in the documentation. In some cases it is remarked that the number does not concern the whole period 1540-1700. However, it is rather unlikely that the total number of executions could be significantly higher. See W. Monter, p. 48 n. 37, p. 53 and 327
  72. ^ a b c d e W. Monter, Frontiers of heresy, p. 327
  73. ^ W. Monter, p. 309 i 329
  74. ^ Museo de la InquisiciÃ³n y del Congreso
  75. ^ The Catholic Encyclopedia: Mexico
  76. ^ Francisco Fajardo SpÃ­nola, La actividad procesal del Santo Oficio. Algunas consideraciones sobre su estudio, Manuscrits 17, 1999, p. 114
  77. ^ W. Monter, Frontiers of heresy, p. 48.
  78. ^ 4 burned between 1553 and 1558 (W.Monter, Frontiers of heresy, p. 37-38 n. 22), and 19 in the period 1570-1625 (W. Monter, Frontiers of heresy, p. 48)
  79. ^ This number includes 14 persons burned in 1560s. (W. Monter, p. 44 i 233) and 24 burned between 1570 and 1625 (W. Monter, p. 48).
  80. ^ About hundred burned during a decade from 1558 (W. Monter, p. 43) and 11 executed in the period 1570-1625 (W.Monter, p. 48).
  81. ^ This number includes 2 executions in the auto da fe in 1545 (W.Monter, Frontiers of heresy, p. 38) and 96 given by Henningsen and Contreras for the period 1555-1699 (Hennigsen, The Database of the Spanish Inquisition, p. 58 and 65)
  82. ^ This number includes 6 executions given by Henningsen and Contreras for the period 1620-1670 (Henningsen, The Database of the Spanish Inquisition, p. 58 and 65) and 26 burned in two famous autos da fe in 1559 (W.Monter, Frontiers of heresy, p. 41 i 44). W. Monter, Frontiers of heresy., p. 48 n. 37, estimates, basing on data from the other Castilian tribunals, that between 1570 and 1625 about twenty more persons may have been burned by the tribunal of Valladolid, which, if correct, would bring the total number to at least 52.
  83. ^ a b c d e f g "A Kinder, Gentler Inquisition", by Richard Kagan in the New York Times, April 19, 1998.
  84. ^ a b "Henry Charles Lea Papers - Biographical Sketch". Univ. of Penn.-Penn Special Collections. January 11, 2003. http://www.library.upenn.edu/collections/rbm/mss/lea/leabio.html/. Retrieved on 2007-04-18.
  85. ^ Van Hove, Brian (November 12, 1996). "A New Industry: The Inquisition". Catholic.net. http://www.catholic.net/RCC/Periodicals/Dossier/1112-96/article3.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-18.
  86. ^ See for example Jean-Pierre Dedieu, Los Cuatro Tiempos, in BartolomÃ© Benassar, InquisiciÃ³n EspaÃ±ola: poder polÃ­tico y control social, pp. 15-39 and Ricardo GarcÃ­a CÃ¡rcel, OrÃ­genes de la InquisiciÃ³n EspaÃ±ola. El Tribunal de Valencia, 1478-1530. Barcelona, 1976.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Henry Charles Lea, A History of the Inquisition of Spain (4 volumes), (New York and London, 1906â1907).
  * Henry Kamen, The Spanish Inquisition: A Historical Revision. (Yale University Press, 1999).
  * Antonio Puigblanch, La InquisiciÃ³n sin mÃ¡scara (CÃ¡diz, 1811-1813). [The Inquisition Unmasked (London, 1816)]
  * Juan Antonio Llorente, âHistoria crÃ­tica de la InquisiciÃ³n de EspaÃ±aâ
  * William Thomas Walsh, Isabella of Spain (1930) and Characters of the Inquisition (1940). Both reprinted by TAN Books (1987).
  * R. Sabbatini, âTorquemada and the Spanish Inquisition,â (1913).
  * C. Roth, âThe Spanish Inquisition,â (1937).
  * C. Roth, âHistory of the Marranos,â (1932).
  * A.S. Turberville, âMedieval History and the Inquisition,â (1920).
  * A.S. Turberville, âThe Spanish Inquisition,â (1932).
  * Genaro GarcÃ­a, âLa InquisiciÃ³n de MÃ©xico,â (1906).
  * Genaro Garcia, âAutos de fe de la InquisiciÃ³n de Mexico,â (1910).
  * F. Garau, âLa Fee Triunfante,â (1691-reprinted 1931).
  * J.T. Medina, âHistoria de la Inquisicion de Lima; de Chile; le la Plata; de Cartagena de las Indias; en las islas Filipinasâ (6 volumes), (1887â1899).
  * V. Vignau, âCatÃ¡logo... de la InquisiciÃ³n de Toledo,â (1903).
  * J. Baker, âHistory of the Inquisition,â (1736).
  * âHistory of the Inquisition from its origin under Pope Innocent III till the present time. Also the private practices of the Inquisitors, the form of trial and modes of torture,â (1814).
  * J. Marchant, âA Review of the Bloody Tribunal,â (1770).
  * E.N Adler, âAutos de fe and the Jew,â (1908).
  * GonzÃ¡lez de Montes, âDiscovery and Playne Declaration of Sundry Subtile Practices of the Holy Inquisition of Spayneâ
  * Ludovico a Paramo, âDe Origine et Progressu Sanctae Inquisitionis,â (1598).
  * J.M. MarÃ­n, âProcedimientos de la InquisiciÃ³nâ (2 volumes), (1886).
  * I. de las Cagigas, âLibro Verde de Aragon,â (1929).
  * R. Cappa, âLa Inquisicion Espanola,â (1888).
  * A. Paz y Mellia, âCatÃ¡logo Abreviado de Papeles de InquisiciÃ³n,â (1914).
  * A.F.G. Bell, âLuis de Leon,â (1925).
  * M. Jouve, âTorquemada,â (1935).
  * Sir Alexander G. Cardew, âA Short History of the Inquisition,â (1933).
  * G. G. Coulton, The Inquisition, (1929)
  * âMemoires Instructifs pour un Voyageur dans les Divers Etats de lâEurope,â (1738).
  * Ramon de Vilana Perlas, âLa verdadera prÃ¡ctica apostÃ³lica de el S. Tribunal de la InquisiciÃ³n,â (1735).
  * H.B. Piazza, âA Short and True Account of the Inquisition and its Proceeding,â (1722).
  * A.L. Maycock, âThe Inquisition,â (1926).
  * H. Nickerson, âThe Inquisition,â (1932).
  * Conde de Castellano, âUn Complot Terrorista en el Siglo XV; los Comienzos de la Inquisicion Aragonesa,â (1927).
  * Bernard Gui, âManuel de lâInquisiteur,â (1927).
  * L. Tanon, âHistoire des Tribunaux de lâInquisition,â (1893).
  * A.J. Texeira, âAntonio Homem e a Inquisicao,â (1902).
  * A. Baiao, âA InquisiÃ§ao em Portugal e no Brasil,â (1921).
  * A. Herculano, âHistoria da Origem e Estabelecimento da InquisiÃ§ao em Portugal,â (English translation, 1926).
  * Simon Whitechapel, Flesh Inferno: Atrocities of Torquemada and the Spanish Inquisition (Creation Books, 2003).
  * Miranda Twiss, The Most Evil Men And Women In History (Michael O'Mara Books Ltd., 2002).
  * Geoffrey Parker âSome Recent Work on the Inquisition in Spain and Italyâ Journal of Modern History 54:3 1982
  * Warren H. Carroll, "Isabel: the Catholic Queen" Front Royal, Virginia, 1991 (Christendom Press)
  * Joseph de Maistre, Letters on the Spanish Inquisition (1822, composed 1815):â late defence of the Inquisition.
  * Ludwig von Pastor, History of the Popes from the Close of the Middle Ages; Drawn from the Secret Archives of the Vatican and other original sources, 40 vols. St. Louis, B.Herder 1898

## [edit] External links

  * Ingersoll, Robert Green. "Spain and Spaniard". Bank of Wisdom. http://www.infidels.org/library/historical/robert_ingersoll/spain_and_spaniard.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-17.
  * "Title Catalog". The Library of Iberian Resources. http://libro.uca.edu/title.htm. Retrieved on 2006-05-17. Scholarly studies including A History of the Inquisition of Spain by Henry Charles Lea : 
    * Lea, Henry Charles (October 1905). "A History of the Inquisition of Spain, Vol. One". Macmillan. http://libro.uca.edu/lea1/index.htm.
    * Lea, Henry Charles (October 1905). "A History of the Inquisition of Spain, Vol. Two". Macmillan. http://libro.uca.edu/lea2/index.htm.
    * Lea, Henry Charles (October 1905). "A History of the Inquisition of Spain, Vol. Three". Macmillan. http://libro.uca.edu/lea3/index.htm.
    * Lea, Henry Charles (October 1905). "A History of the Inquisition of Spain, Vol. Four". Macmillan. http://libro.uca.edu/lea4/index.htm.
  * "Letters on the Spanish Inquisition Joseph de Maistre". http://www.umanitoba.ca/faculties/arts/history/links/maistre/spanishinquisition.html.

v â¢ d â¢ e

History of Christianity  
Jesus & the Apostles

Background Â· Timeline Â· Ministry Â· Good News Â· Death & Resurrection Â·
Holy Spirit Â· Gospels Â· Acts Â· Apostolic Age Â· The 12 Â· Paul Â· Jerusalem
Council  
Ante-Nicene Church

History Of Â· Justin Martyr Â· Ignatius Â· Persecutions Â· Church Fathers Â·
Irenaeus Â· Marcionism Â· NT Canon Â· Tertullian Â· Montanism Â· Origen  
Christian Roman Empire

Constantine Â· Monasticism Â· Councils: Nicaea I Â· Athanasius Â· Arianism Â·
Constantinople I Â· Nicene Creed Â· Jerome Â· Augustine Â· Ephesus Â·
Chalcedon  
Eastern Christianity

History Of Â· History of E. Orthodoxy Â· Asia Â· Oriental Orxy. Â· Coptic Â·
Syria Â· Armenia Â· Chrysostom Â· Islam Â· Icon Â· East-West Schism Â· Fall Â·
Russian Â· Under the Ottomans Â· 20th century  
Middle Ages

Pelagianism Â· Gregory I Â· Celtic Â· Germanic & Scandinavian Â· Investiture
Â· Anselm of Canterbury Â· Abelard Â· Bernard of Clairvaux Â· Crusades Â·
Inquisition  
Scholasticism Â· Dominic Â· Francis of Assisi Â· 4th Lateran Â· Bonaventure Â·
Thomas Aquinas Â· Wycliffe Â· Avignon Â· Papal Schism Â· Jan Hus Â·
Conciliarism  
Protestant  
Reformation

Protestantism, History of Â· Erasmus Â· Five Solas Â· Eucharistic Theologies
Â· Calvinist v. Arminian Â· Arminianism Â· Synod of Dort Â· Wars Â·
Colonization  
Lutheranism Â· Martin Luther Â· 95 Theses Â· Diet of Worms Â· Melanchthon Â·
Crypto-Calvinism Â· Gnesio-Lutherans Â· Lutheran Orthodoxy Â· Eucharist Â·
Book of Concord  
Reformed Â· Zwinglianism Â· In Switzerland Â· John Calvin Â· History of
Calvinism Â· John Knox Â· TULIP Â· Synod of Dort  
Anabaptism Â· Radical Reformation Â· Conrad Grebel Â· Swiss Brethren Â·
MÃ¼ntzer Â· Menno Simons  
English Reformation: History, Timeline Â· Henry VIII Â· Cranmer Â· Elizabethan
Settlement Â· 39 Articles Â· Book of Common Prayer Â· In Scotland Â· Civil War  
  
Roman Catholicism

History of the Papacy Â· Lateran IV Â· Trent Â· Counter-Reformation Â· Thomas
More Â· Leo X Â· Guadalupe Â· Jesuits Â· Francis Xavier  
Dissolution of the Monasteries Â· Wars Â· Paul III Â· Pius V Â· Tridentine
Mass Â· Teresa of Avila Â· Bellarmine Â· Oratory of Neri Â· Vatican I Â·
Vatican II Â· Roman Catholic Timeline  
Age of Reason & Revival

17th century denominations in England Â· Adventism Â· Baptists Â·
Congregationalism Â· First Great Awakening Â· History of Jehovah's Witnesses
Â· History of the Anglican Communion Â· History of the Latter Day Saint
movement Â· History of the Seventh-day Adventist Church Â· Latter Day Saint
movement Â· Methodism Â· Millerites Â· Neo-Lutheranism Â· Old Lutherans Â·
Pietism Â· Puritanism Â· English Civil War Â· Wars of Religion Â· Restoration
Movement Â· Restorationism Â· Revivalism  
Industrial Age

Camp meeting Â· Holiness movement Â· Independent Catholic Churches Â· Second
Great Awakening  
Age of Ideologies

Azusa Street Revival Â· Ecumenism Â· Evangelicalism Â· Jesus movement Â·
Mainline (Protestant) Â· Pentecostalism Â· Charismatic movement  
Christianity Â· Christianity Timeline Â· Christian Theology Â· Christian
Martyrs Â· Timeline of Christian missions â History of: Eastern Orthodoxy Â·
Oriental Orthodoxy Â· Protestantism Â· Roman Catholicism  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Antisemitism  
Core topics

History Â· Timeline Â· Canards Â· Persecution of Jews Â· New antisemitism  
Antisemitism and...

Anti-globalization Â· Arabs Â· Christianity Â· Islam Â· Nation of Islam  
Related topics

Philosemitism Â· Anti-Zionism Â· Self-hating Jew Â· Nazi propaganda Â· UstaÅ¡e
Â· Jewish Bolshevism  
Religious antisemitism

Anti-Judaism Â· Martin Luther Â· Spanish Inquisition Â· Portuguese Inquisition
Â· Blood curse Â· Blood libel Â· Host desecration Â· Judensau  
Antisemitic laws, policies, and government actions

Ghetto benches Â· Hep-Hep riots Â· Pogroms in the Russian Empire Â· May Laws
Â· Polish 1968 political crisis Â· Leo Frank trial (USA) Â· Dreyfus Affair
(France) Â· Farhud (Iraq) Â· General Order No. 11 (USA, 1862) Â· Historical
revisionism (negationism) Â· Nazi Germany and the Holocaust Â· Racial policy
of Nazi Germany Â· Holocaust denial  
Antisemitic websites

Jew Watch Â· Radio Islam Â· Institute for Historical Review Â· Bible Believers
Â· Stormfront.org  
Organizations working against antisemitism

Simon Wiesenthal Center (SWC) Â· Anti-Defamation League (ADL) Â· Stephen Roth
Institute Â· Bay Area Holocaust Oral History Project (BAHOHP) Â· Scholars for
Peace in the Middle East (SPME) Â· Middle East Media Research Institute
(MEMRI) Â· Jewish Defense League (JDL) Â· Yad Vashem  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spanish_Inquisition"

Categories: 1478 establishments | 1834 disestablishments | Anti-Judaism |
Anti-Protestantism | Antisemitic attacks and incidents | Modern Christian
history | Islamic history | Jewish Spanish history | Jews and Judaism-related
controversies | Judeo-Islamic topics | Religion and violence | Religious
persecution | Sephardi Jews topics | Spanish Inquisition | Anti-Islam
sentiment | Discrimination | Homophobia

Hidden categories: Cleanup from March 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since
December 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2007 | Articles
with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles with unsourced
statements since March 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since January
2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Malti
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 16 April 2009, at 21:37 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



