
# Les Chants de Maldoror

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The Songs of Maldoror  
Author Comte de Lautreamont (Isidore Lucien Ducasse)  
Original title Les Chants de Maldoror  
Country France, Uruguay  
Language French  
Genre(s) Poetic novel  
Les Chants de Maldoror (The Songs of Maldoror) is a poetic novel (or a long
prose poem) consisting of six cantos. It was written between 1868 and 1869 by
the Comte de Lautreamont, the pseudonym of Isidore Lucien Ducasse. Many of the
surrealists (Salvador DalÃ­, AndrÃ© Breton, Antonin Artaud, Marcel Duchamp,
Man Ray, Max Ernst, etc.) in the early 1900s cited the novel as a major
inspiration to their own works and Les Chants de Maldoror, and its protagonist
Maldoror, have continued to fascinate people since its publication.

## Contents

  * 1 Theme and composition
  * 2 Influence
  * 3 Allusions/references from other works
  * 4 Original French text
  * 5 English translations

  
## [edit] Theme and composition

Les Chants de Maldoror is a poem of six cantos which are subdivided into 60
verses of different length (I/14, II/16, III/5, IV/8, V/7, VI/10). The verses
were originally not numbered, but rather separated by lines. The final eight
verses of the last canto form a small novel, and were marked with Roman
numerals. Each canto closes with a line to indicate its end.

It is impossible to summarize the work because it does not have specific plot
in the traditional sense, and the narrative style is non-linear and often
surrealistic. The work revolves around the misanthropic character of Maldoror,
a figure of absolute evil who is opposed to God and humanity, and has
renounced all ties to conventional morality and decency. The iconoclastic
imagery and tone is typically violent and macabre, and ostensibly nihilistic.
Much of the imagery was borrowed from the popular gothic literature of the
period, in particular Lord Byron's Manfred, Charles Robert Maturin's Melmoth
the Wanderer and Goethe's Faust. Of these figures, the latter two are
particularly significant in their portrayal of a negative and Satanic anti-
hero who is in hostile opposition to God. The last eight stanzas of the final
canto are in a way a small novel dealing with the seduction and murder of a
youth. It has been shown that parts of the work have been appropriated from a
work of natural history first published in 1861.

At the beginning and end of the cantos, the text often refers to the work
itself; LautrÃ©amont also references himself in the capacity of the author of
the work; Isidore is recognized as the "Montevidean". In order to enable the
reader to realise that he is embarking on a "dangerous philosophical journey",
LautrÃ©amont uses stylistic means of identification with the reader, a
procedure which author Baudelaire already used in his introduction of Les
Fleurs du Mal. He also comments on the work, providing instructions for
reading. The first sentence contains a "warning" to the reader:

> God grant that the reader, emboldened and having become at present as fierce
as what he is reading, find, without loss of bearings, his way, his wild and
treacherous passage through the desolate swamps of these sombre, poison-soaked
pages; for, unless he should bring to his reading a rigorous logic and a
sustained mental effort at least as strong as his distrust, the lethal fumes
of this book shall dissolve his soul as water does sugar.

> â(1,1)

## [edit] Influence

Les Chants de Maldoror is considered to have been a major influence upon
French Symbolism, Dada, and Surrealism. Several editions of the book have
included lithographs by the French symbolist painter Odilon Redon. Surrealist
painter Salvador DalÃ­ also illustrated one edition of the book. The Italian
painter Amedeo Modigliani used to carry a copy around in Montparnasse and
quote from it. The outsider artist Unica ZÃ¼rn was also influenced by it in
writing her The Man of Jasmine.

## [edit] Allusions/references from other works

<IMG>

Lists of miscellaneous information should be avoided. Please relocate any
relevant information into appropriate sections or articles. (October 2007)  
Maldoror was made into a short film by award-winning filmmaker Daniel Stedman

Musician Steven Severin of Siouxsie and the Banshees released a solo CD,
Maldoror, in 1999 (via internet only) consisting of reworkings of tracks he
had written for a Brazilian theatrical adaptation of the book six years prior.

The English music group Current 93 has several songs referencing Maldoror, the
earliest being their debut track "Maldoror Est Mort" on the Mi-Mort cassette.

The title of Nurse With Wound's debut album, Chance Meeting on a Dissecting
Table of a Sewing Machine and an Umbrella, comes from a sentence by
LautrÃ©amont.

Maldoror was used as the name for Merzbow's 1999 noise collaboration with Mike
Patton.

Skinny Puppy's lead singer niveK oGre is stated to have based his early
lyrical stylings on Maldoror.

Avant-garde cellist Erik Friedlander released an improvisational album
entitled "Maldoror" in 2003 based around his impressions of the novel.

Portuguese alternative-rock band MÃ£o Morta, together with some portuguese
collaborators, conceived a show mixing music, theatre, video and declamation,
based on the novel. It premiered in Braga on the 11th of May 2007.

British rock band Bauhaus references Maldoror in the song "The Three Shadows"
from their 1982 LP entitled The Sky's Gone Out with the lyrics: "i hold the
fresh pink baby with a smile. i slice off those rosy cheeks because i feel so
thirsty."

The German experimental metal collective The Ocean stated Les Chants de
Maldoror to be a great conceptual and lyrical influence on their latest work,
Precambrian.

Maldoror is a the subject of a character study by Albert Camus in The Rebel.

A character in Jean-Luc Godard's film Week End reads aloud a passage from the
book.

Italian-Slovenian musical group Devil Doll (band) derive many lyrical themes
present in their 1996 release "Dies Irae (album)" from Maldoror, some of which
include direct quotations from the novel.

## [edit] Original French text

  * (French) French wikisource text of Les Chants de Maldoror
  * (French) Les Chants de Maldoror in the gutenberg library

## [edit] English translations

  * Lykiard, Alexis (translator). Maldoror and the Complete Works. (1994) ISBN 1-878972-12-X
  * Wernham, Guy (translator). Maldoror. (1943) ISBN 0-8112-0082-5
  * Knight, Paul (translator). Maldoror and Poems. (1988) ISBN 0-14-044342-8
  * Rodker, John (translator). The Lay of Maldoror. (1924)
  * Kisa, Sonja Elen: http://www.kisa.ca/maldoror/english.html

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Les_Chants_de_Maldoror"

Categories: French novels | Surrealist works | Satirical books | Gothic
fiction | Gothic novels

Hidden categories: Articles with trivia sections from October 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 March 2009, at 16:46 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



