
# Joseph Ducreux

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

Self-portrait, ca. 1783

Joseph, baron Ducreux (June 26, 1735-July 24, 1802) was a French portrait
painter, pastelist, miniaturist, and engraver. Born in Nancy, Ducreux may have
trained with his father, who was also a painter. Ducreux went to Paris in
1760, and trained as the only student of pastelist Maurice-Quentin de La Tour,
who specialized in portraiture. In terms of Ducreux's oil technique, Jean-
Baptiste Greuze also served as an important influence as his instructor.

Ducreux specialized in portrait painting, and his early portraits were done in
pastel, and include those done of the connoisseurs Pierre-Jean Mariette, the
Comte de Caylus and Ange-Laurent de la Live de July. These works may have been
copies after De La Tour.

Ducreux also made several well-known self-portraits in the late 1780s,
including one in which he painted himself in the middle of a large yawn (which
currently hangs in the Getty Center), and another of himself guffawing and
pointing at the viewer. As evidenced by these self-portraits, Ducreux
attempted to break free from the constraints of traditional portraiture.
Interested in physiognomy, which is based on the belief that the study and
judgment of a person's outer appearance, primarily the face, reflects their
character or personality, Ducreux attempted to capture the personality of his
subjects âas well as his own- through his warm and individualistic works. Le
Discret (ca. 1790), for example, is the portrait of a man asking for silence.
His expression is timorous, his finger is pressed against his mouth in alarm
as he silently demands discretion or prudence.[1]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Self-portrait, ca. 1793

In 1769, he was sent to Vienna in order to paint a miniature of Marie-
Antoinette before she left the city in 1770 and married Louis XVI of France.
Ducreux was made a baron and premier peintre de la reine (First Painter to the
Queen) in rewards for his services. Ducreux was given this appointment by
Marie-Antoinette even though he was not a member of the Royal Academy of
Painting and Sculpture, which had been founded in 1648. The academy was
strictly hierarchical and the posts of first painter, ordinary painter and
inspector or inspector general of royal factories were customarily reserved
for members of the academy.

At the outbreak of the French Revolution, Ducreux traveled to London. There he
drew the last portrait ever made of Louis XVI before the king's execution.[2]

Other portraits by Ducreux include those done of Pierre Choderlos de Laclos
and Maria Theresa of Austria.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Marie Antoinette, in 1769; this portrait was sent to the dauphin, so he could
see his bride before he met her

Jacques-Louis David became one of Ducreux's associates when the latter
returned to Paris in 1793. David helped Ducreux continue an official career.
Ducreux's residence became an informal salon for artists and musicians, who
commissioned portraits from him. One of these musicians was his friend Etienne
MÃ©hul, who is said to have based the main character of one of his operas on
Ducreux.

From 1760 and from 1762, Ducreux had kept a list of his works, but throughout
his lifetime, he rarely signed his paintings. Thus, many of his works remain
erroneously attributed to other artists.

Ducreux was the father of Rose-AdÃ©laÃ¯de Ducreux, who also became a painter.

## [edit] Further reading

  * (French) Georgette Lyon, "Joseph Ducreux. Premier peintre de Marie Antoinette," Paris, 1958.
  * (French) Emilie-Juliette Gauby, "Joseph Ducreux 1735-1802 Peintre de portraits", Student at Blaise Pascal University Clermont II, 2004.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Ducreux"

Categories: French painters | French nobility | Portrait artists | 1735 births
| 1802 deaths

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 12 April 2009, at 23:11 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



