
# Priory of Sion

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

The official emblem of the Priory of Sion is partly based on the fleur-de-lis,
which was a symbol particularly associated with the French monarchy.[1]

The PrieurÃ© de Sion, translated from French as Priory of Sion, is a name
given to multiple groups, both real and fictitious. The most notorious is a
fringe fraternal organization, founded and dissolved in France in 1956 by
Pierre Plantard. In the 1960s, Plantard created a fictitious history for that
organization, describing it as a secret society founded in the Kingdom of
Jerusalem in 1099, which preserves the bloodlines of the Merovingian
dynasty.[2] This myth was expanded upon and popularized by the 1982
controversial book The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail,[1] and later claimed as
factual in the preface of the 2003 conspiracy fiction novel The Da Vinci
Code.[3]. There are still a few groups with the name "Priory of sion" that
have a nother unknown agenda

After becoming a cause cÃ©lÃ¨bre from the late 1960s to the 1980s, the
mythical Priory of Sion was exposed as a ludibrium created by Plantard as a
framework for his false pretention to the French throne.[4] Evidence presented
in support of its historical existence and activities before 1956 was
discovered to have been forged and then planted in various locations around
France by Plantard and his accomplices. Nevertheless, many conspiracy
theorists persist in believing that the Priory of Sion is an age-old cabal
which acts as a power behind the throne while concealing a subversive
secret.[5]

The Priory of Sion myth has been exhaustively debunked by journalists and
scholars as one of the great hoaxes of the 20th century.[6] Some skeptics have
expressed concern that the proliferation and popularity of books, websites and
films inspired by this hoax have contributed to the problem of conspiracy
theories, pseudohistory and other confusions becoming more mainstream.[7]
Others are troubled by the romantic reactionary ideology unwittingly promoted
in these works.[8]

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Myth
    * 2.1 Plantard's plot
    * 2.2 The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail
    * 2.3 Pelat Affair
    * 2.4 Sandri revival
    * 2.5 The Da Vinci Code
    * 2.6 The Sion Revelation
    * 2.7 Bloodline movie
  * 3 Alleged Grand Masters
  * 4 Notes
  * 5 Further reading

  
## [edit] History

The Priory of Sion was a fraternal organization founded in the town of
Annemasse in eastern France in 1956. As with all associations, French law
required that the Priory of Sion be registered with the government; the
registration took place at the subprefecture of Saint-Julien-en-Genevois on 7
May 1956 and was noted on 20 July 1956 in the Journal Officiel de la
RÃ©publique FranÃ§aise. The founders and signatories inscribed with their real
names and aliases were Pierre Plantard, also known as "Chyren", and AndrÃ©
Bonhomme, also known as "Stanis Bellas". AndrÃ© Bonhomme was the President
while Pierre Plantard was the Secretary General. The registration documents
also included the names of Jean Deleaval as the Vice-President and Armand
Defago as the Treasurer. The offices of the Priory of Sion and its journal
Circuit were located at Plantard's apartment.[9] The choice of the name "Sion"
was based on a popular local feature, a hill south of Annemasse in France,
known as Mont Sion, where the founders intended to establish a retreat
center.[10] The accompanying title to the name was "Chevalerie d'Institutions
et RÃ¨gles Catholiques d'Union IndÃ©pendante et Traditionaliste": this
subtitle forms the acronym CIRCUIT and translates in English as "Knighthood of
Catholic Rule and Institution and of Independent Traditionalist Union".

The statutes of the Priory of Sion indicate its purpose was to allow and
encourage members to engage in studies and mutual aid. The articles of the
association expressed the goal of creating a Traditionalist Catholic chivalric
order.[11] Article 7 of the statutes of the Priory of Sion stated that its
members were expected "to carry out good deeds, to help the Roman Catholic
Church, teach the truth, defend the weak and the oppressed". Towards the end
of 1956 the association had planned to forge partnerships with the local
Catholic Church of the area which would have involved a school bus service run
by both the Priory of Sion and the church of Saint-Joseph in Annemasse.[12]

The bulk of the activities of the Priory of Sion, however, bore no resemblance
to the objectives as outlined in its statutes: Circuit, the official journal
of the Priory of Sion, was indicated as a news bulletin of an "organization
for the defence of the rights and the freedom of affordable housing" rather
than for the promotion of chivalry-inspired charitable work. The first issue
of the journal is dated 27 May 1956, and, in total, twelve issues appeared.
Some of the articles took a political position in the local council elections.
Others criticized and even attacked real-estate developers of Annemasse.[11]

The formally registered association was dissolved some time after October 1956
but intermittently revived for different reasons by Plantard between 1961 and
1993, though in name and on paper only. The Priory of Sion is considered
dormant by the subprefecture because it has indicated no activities since
1956. According to French law, subsequent references to the Priory bear no
legal relation to that of 1956 and no one, other than the original
signatories, is entitled to use its name in an official capacity. AndrÃ©
Bonhomme played no part in the association after 1956. He officially resigned
in 1973 when he heard that Plantard was linking his name with the association.
In light of Plantard's death in 2000, there is no one who is currently alive
who has official permission to use the name.[13]

## [edit] Myth

### [edit] Plantard's plot

Primarily motivated by delusions of grandeur, a romantic reactionary ideology,
and the prospect of financial gain,[14] Plantard set out to have the Priory of
Sion perceived as a prestigious esoteric Christian chivalric order, whose
members would be people of influence in the fields of finance, politics and
philosophy, devoted to installing the "Grand Monarch", prophesied by
Nostradamus, on the throne of France. Plantard's choice of the pseudonym
"Chyren" was a reference to "Chyren Selin", Nostradamus's anagram for the name
for this Great King.[15]

Between 1961 and 1984, Plantard contrived a mythical pedigree for the Priory
of Sion claiming that it was the offshoot of a real Roman Catholic religious
order housed in the Abbey of Sion, which had been founded in the Kingdom of
Jerusalem during the First Crusade in 1099 and later absorbed by the Jesuits
in 1617. The mistake is often made that this Abbey of Sion was a Priory of
Sion, but there is a difference between an abbey and a priory.[14] Calling his
original 1956 group "Priory of Sion" presumably gave Plantard the later idea
to claim that his organization had been historically founded by crusading
knight Godfrey of Bouillon on Mount Zion near Jerusalem during the Middle
Ages.[5]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The tomb inscribed with the cryptic phrase "Et in Arcadia ego" in Nicolas
Poussin's late 1630s painting Arcadian Shepherds was appropriated for Priory
of Sion myth-making.

Furthermore, Plantard was inspired by a 1960 magazine Les Cahiers de
l'Histoire to center his personal genealogical claims, as found in the "Priory
of Sion documents", around the Merovingian king Dagobert II, who had been
assassinated in the 7th century.[16] He also adopted "Et in Arcadia ego ...",
a slightly altered version of a Latin phrase that most famously appears as the
title of two paintings by Nicolas Poussin, as the motto of both his family and
the Priory of Sion,[17] because the tomb which appears in these paintings
resembled one in the Les Pontils area near Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau. This tomb would
become a symbol for his dynastic claims as the last legacy of the Merovingians
on the territory of RazÃ¨s, left to remind the select few who have been
initiated into these mysteries that the "lost king", Dagobert II, would
figuratively come back in the form of a hereditary pretender.[18][19]

To give credibility to the fabricated lineage and pedigree, Plantard and his
friend, Philippe de ChÃ©risey, needed to create "independent evidence". So
during the 1960s, they created and deposited a series of false documents, the
so-called Dossiers Secrets d'Henri Lobineau ("Secret Files of Henri
Lobineau"), at the BibliothÃ¨que nationale de France in Paris. During the same
decade, Plantard commissioned de ChÃ©risey to forge a series of medieval
parchments. These documents contained encrypted messages that referred to the
Priory of Sion. They adapted, and used to their advantage, the earlier false
claims put forward by NoÃ«l Corbu that a Catholic priest named BÃ©renger
SauniÃ¨re had supposedly discovered ancient parchments inside a pillar while
renovating his church in Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau in 1891. Inspired by the
popularity of media reports and books in France about the discovery of the
Dead Sea scrolls in the West Bank, they hoped this same theme would attract
attention to their parchments.[20] Their version of the parchments was
intended to prove Plantard's claims about the Priory of Sion being a medieval
society which was the source of the "underground stream" of esotericism in
Europe.[5]

Plantard then enlisted the aid of author GÃ©rard de SÃ¨de to write a book
based on his unpublished manuscript and forged parchments,[20] alleging that
SauniÃ¨re had discovered a link to a hidden treasure. The 1967 book L'or de
Rennes, ou La vie insolite de BÃ©renger SauniÃ¨re, curÃ© de Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau
("The Gold of Rennes, or The Strange Life of BÃ©renger SauniÃ¨re, Priest of
Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau"), which was later published in paperback under the title
Le TrÃ©sor Maudit de Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau ("The Accursed Treasure of Rennes-le-
ChÃ¢teau"), became a popular read in France. It included copies of the found
documents (the originals were of course never produced), though it did not
provide translations. One of the Latin texts in the documents was copied from
the Novum Testamentum, an attempted restoration of the Vulgate by John
Wordsworth and Henry White.[21] The other text was copied from the Codex
Bezae.[22] Based on the wording used, the versions of the Latin texts found in
the parchments can be shown to have been copied from books first published in
1889 and 1895, which is problematic considering that de SÃ¨de's book was
trying to make a case that these documents were centuries old.

In 1969, English actor and science-fiction scriptwriter Henry Lincoln became
intrigued after reading Le TrÃ©sor Maudit. He discovered one of the encrypted
messages, which read "Ã Dagobert II Roi et Ã Sion est ce trÃ©sor, et il est
lÃ mort" ("To Dagobert II, King, and to Sion belongs this treasure and he is
there dead"). This was an allusion to the resting place of a cult hero seen as
a buried treasure belonging to both Merovingian king Dagobert II and the
Priory of Sion.[1] Lincoln expanded on the conspiracy theories, writing his
own books on the subject, and creating a series of BBC Two documentaries in
the 1970s about the mysteries of the Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau area. In response to a
tip from GÃ©rard de SÃ¨de, Lincoln claims he was also the one who discovered
the Dossiers Secrets, a series of planted genealogies which appeared to
further confirm the link with the extinct Merovingian bloodline. The documents
claimed that the Priory of Sion and the Knights Templar were two fronts of one
unified organization with the same leadership until 1188.[1]

Letters in existence dating from the 1960s written by Plantard, de ChÃ©risey
and de SÃ¨de to each other confirm that the three were engaging in an out-and-
out hoax. The letters describe schemes to combat criticisms of their various
allegations and ways they would make up new allegations to try to keep the
hoax alive. These letters (totalling over 100) are in the possession of French
researcher Jean-Luc Chaumeil, who has also retained the original envelopes.
Jean-Luc Chaumeil was part of the Priory of Sion hoax ring during the 1970s,
and wrote books and articles about Plantard and the Priory of Sion before
leaving it during the late 1970s and exposing Plantard's past in French books.
A letter later discovered at the subprefecture of Saint-Julien-en-Genevois
also indicated that Plantard had a criminal conviction as a con
artist.[23][24]

### [edit] The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail

For more details on this topic, see The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail.

After reading Le TrÃ©sor Maudit, Lincoln persuaded BBC Two to devote three
episodes in their Chronicle documentary series to the topic. These became
quite popular and generated thousands of responses. Lincoln then joined forces
with Michael Baigent and Richard Leigh for further research. This led them to
the pseudohistorical Dossiers Secrets at the BibliothÃ¨que nationale de
France, which though alleging to portray hundreds of years of medieval
history, were actually all written by Plantard and de ChÃ©risey under the
pseudonym of "Philippe Toscan du Plantier". Unaware that the documents had
been forged, Lincoln, Baigent and Leigh used them as a major source for their
1982 controversial non-fiction book The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail,[1] in
which they presented the following myths as facts to support their
hypotheses:[7]

  * there is a secret society known as the Priory of Sion, which has a long history starting in 1099, and had illustrious Grand Masters including Leonardo da Vinci, Victor Hugo and Jean Cocteau;
  * it created the Knights Templar as its military arm and financial branch; and
  * it is devoted to installing the Merovingian dynasty, that ruled the Franks from 457 to 751, on the thrones of France and the rest of Europe.

However, the authors re-interpreted the Dossiers Secrets in the light of their
own interest in undermining the Roman Catholic Church's institutional reading
of Judeo-Christian history.[25] Contrary to Plantard's initial Franco-
Israelist claim that the Merovingians were only descended from the Tribe of
Benjamin,[26] they asserted that:

  * the Priory of Sion protects Merovingian dynasts because they may be the genealogical descendants of the historical Jesus and his alleged wife, Mary Magdalene, traced further back to King David; and
  * the Church tried to kill off all remnants of this dynasty and their supposed guardians, the Cathars and the Templars, in order for popes to hold the episcopal throne through the apostolic succession of Peter without fear of it ever being usurped by an antipope from the hereditary succession of Mary Magdalene.

The authors therefore concluded that the modern goals of the Priory of Sion
are:

  * the public revelation of the Holy Grail \- a secret tied to the lost treasure of the Temple in Jerusalem \- which would facilitate Merovingian restoration in France;
  * the establishment of a theocratic "United States of Europe", as an interlocking network of Merovingian popular monarchies, which would re-institutionalize chivalry, and be politically and religiously unified through the imperial cult of a Merovingian sacred king, who occupies both the throne of Europe and the Holy See; and
  * the transfer of the governance of Europe and its sphere of influence to the Priory of Sion through a federal parliament.

The authors also incorporated the antisemitic and anti-Masonic tract known as
The Protocols of the Elders of Zion into their story, concluding that it
actually referred to the activities of the Priory of Sion. They presented it
as the most persuasive piece of evidence for the existence and activities of
the Priory of Sion by arguing that:

  * the original text on which the published version of The Protocols of the Elders of Zion was based had nothing to do with a Zionist conspiracy. It issued from a Masonic body practicing the Rite of Strict Observance which incorporated the word "Zion" in its name;
  * the original text was not intended to be released publicly, but was a program for gaining control of Freemasonry as part of a strategy to reorganize church and state according to esoteric Christian principles;
  * after a failed attempt to gain influence in the court of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia, Sergei Nilus changed the original text to forge an inflammatory tract in 1903 in order to discredit the esoteric clique around Papus by implying they were Judaeo-Masonic conspirators; and
  * some esoteric Christian elements in the original text were ignored by Nilus and hence remained unchanged in the antisemitic canard he published.

In reaction to this memetic synthesis of investigative journalism with
religious conspiracism, many secular conspiracy theorists added the Priory of
Sion to their list of secret societies collaborating or competing to
manipulate political happenings from behind the scenes in their bid for world
domination.[27] Some occultists speculated that the emergence of the Priory of
Sion and Plantard closely follows The Prophecies by M. Michel Nostradamus
(unaware that Plantard was intentionally trying to fulfill them).[28] Fringe
Christian eschatologists countered that it was a fulfillment of prophecies
found in the Book of Revelation and further proof of an anti-Christian
conspiracy of epic proportions.[29]

However, professional historians and scholars from related fields do not
accept The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail as a serious dissertation,[30] and
regard it as one of the best examples of "counterknowledge".[31] French
authors like Franck Marie (1978),[32] Jean-Luc Chaumeil (1994),[33] and Pierre
Jarnac (1985),[34] (1988),[35] and more recently Marie-France Etchegoin and
FrÃ©dÃ©ric Lenoir (2004),[36] Massimo Introvigne (2005),[37] Jean-Jacques Bedu
(2005),[38] and Bernardo Sanchez Da Motta (2005),[39] have never taken
Plantard and the Priory of Sion as seriously as Lincoln, Baigent and Leigh.
They eventually concluded that it was all a hoax, outlining in detail the
reasons for their verdict, and giving detailed evidence that the Holy Blood
authors had not reported comprehensively.[40] They imply that this evidence
had been ignored by Lincoln, Baigent and Leigh in order to bolster the
mythical version of the Priory's history that was developed by Plantard during
the early 1960s after meeting author GÃ©rard de SÃ¨de.[40]

As a consequence, in 1989, Plantard tried but failed to salvage his reputation
and agenda as a mystagogue in French esoteric circles by claiming that the
Priory of Sion had actually been founded in 1681 at Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau, and
was focused on harnessing the paranormal power of ley lines and megaliths in
the area, rather than protecting the Merovingian dynasty.[20]

### [edit] Pelat Affair

In September 1993, while investigative judge Thierry Jean-Pierre was
investigating the activities of multi-millionaire Roger-Patrice Pelat in the
context of the Pechiney-Triangle Affair, he was informed that Pelat may have
once been Grand Master of an esoteric society known as the Priory of Sion.
Pelat's name had been on Plantard's list of Grand Masters since 1989. In fact,
Pelat had died in 1989, while he was being indicted for insider trading \-
"dÃ©lit d'initiÃ©" in French. Plantard may have been naive about financial
terms and interpreted the word "initiÃ©" esoterically, to mean "initiate".
Following a long established pattern, Plantard "recruited" the "initiate"
Pelat soon after his death and included him as the most recent Priory of Sion
Grand Master.[41] Plantard had first claimed that Pelat had been a Grand
Master in a Priory of Sion pamphlet dated March 8, 1989, then claimed it again
later in a 1990 issue of Vaincre, the revived publication of Alpha Galates, a
pseudo-chivalric order created by Plantard in Vichy France to support the
"National Revolution".[42][43]

Pelat had been a friend of FranÃ§ois Mitterrand, then President of France, and
at the centre of a scandal involving French Prime Minister Pierre BÃ©rÃ©govoy.
As an investigative judge, Thierry Jean-Pierre could not dismiss any
information brought to his attention pertaining to the case, especially if it
might have led to a scandal similar to the one implicating an illegal Masonic
lodge named Propaganda Due in the 1982 Banco Ambrosiano bank failure in Italy.
He never considered it worthwhile, however, to meet Plantard, but did order a
search of Plantard's home. The search turned up a hoard of false documents,
including some proclaiming Plantard the true king of France. Plantard admitted
under oath he had fabricated everything, including Pelat's involvement with
the Priory of Sion.[41][44] Plantard was threatened with legal action by the
Pelat family and therefore disappeared to his house in southern France. He was
74 years old at the time. Nothing more was heard of him until he died in Paris
on 3 February 2000.[45]

### [edit] Sandri revival

On 27 December 2002, an open letter announced the revival of the Priory of
Sion as an integral traditionalist esoteric society, which stated that: "The
Commanderies of Saint-Denis, Millau, Geneva and Barcelona are fully operative.
According to the Tradition, the first Commanderie is under the direction of a
woman", claiming there were 9,841 members.[46] It was signed by Gino Sandri
(who claims to be Plantard's former private secretary) under the title of
General Secretary,[47] and by "P. Plantard" (Le Nautonnier, G. Chyren). Sandri
is a well-versed occultist who has spent his life infiltrating esoteric
societies only to get expelled from them.[48] After interviewing Sandri,
independent researcher Laurent Octonovo Buccholtzer wrote:

> Iâve personally met this Gino Sandri on one occasion, and I had the
opportunity to have a really good talk with him, but I think that he's simply
seeking attention. He seemed to me to be something of a mythomaniac, which
would certainly be an excellent qualification for being Secretary of the
Priory of Sion. During our conversation he said something in passing that I
found quite extraordinary. He said, âUltimately, what is the Priory of Sion?
It's nothing more than a well-known brand name, but with goodness knows what
behind it?â He gave a good brief account of the phenomenon of the Priory of
Sion. Thanks to Dan Brown, hundreds of millions of people now have âbrand
awarenessâ, and several million of them seem to take it seriously.[45]

### [edit] The Da Vinci Code

For more details on this topic, see The Priory of Sion in the Da Vinci Code.

As a result of Dan Brown's best-selling 2003 conspiracy fiction novel The Da
Vinci Code and the subsequent 2006 film,[3] there has been a new level of
public interest in the Priory of Sion. Brown's novel promotes the mythical
version of the Priory but departs from the ultimate conclusions presented in
The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail. Rather than plotting to create a Federal
Europe ruled by a Merovingian sacred king descended from the historical Jesus,
the Priory of Sion initiates its members into a mystery cult seeking to
restore the feminist theology necessary for a complete understanding of early
Christianity, which was supposedly suppressed by the Roman Catholic Church.
The author has presented this speculation as fact in a non-fiction preface,
public appearances, and interviews.

Furthermore, in their 1987 sequel The Messianic Legacy,[49] Lincoln, Baigent
and Leigh suggested that there was a current conflict between the Priory of
Sion and the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, which they speculated might
have originated from an earlier rivalry between the Knights Templar and
Knights Hospitaller during the Crusades. However, for the dramatic structure
of The Da Vinci Code, Brown chose the controversial Roman Catholic prelature
Opus Dei as the Assassini-like nemesis of the Priory of Sion, despite the fact
that no author had ever argued that there is a conflict between these two
groups.

### [edit] The Sion Revelation

Further conspiracy theories were reported in the 2006 non-fiction book The
Sion Revelation: The Truth About the Guardians of Christ's Sacred Bloodline by
Lynn Picknett and Clive Prince (authors of the 1997 non-fiction book The
Templar Revelation, the principal source for Dan Brown's claims about hidden
messages in the work of Leonardo da Vinci).[50] They accepted that the
pre-1956 history of the Priory of Sion was a hoax created by Plantard, and
that his claim that he was a Merovingian dynast was a lie. However, they
insist that this was part of a complex red herring intended to distract the
public from the hidden agenda of Plantard and his "controllers". They argue
that the Priory of Sion was a front organization for one of the many crypto-
political societies which have been plotting to create a "United States of
Europe" in line with French occultist Alexandre Saint-Yves d'Alveydre's
synarchist vision of an ideal form of government.

### [edit] Bloodline movie

The 2008 documentary film Bloodline by Bruce Burgess, a filmmaker with an
interest in paranormal claims, expands on the "Jesus bloodline" hypothesis and
other elements of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail. Accepting as valid the
testimony of an amateur archaeologist codenamed "Ben Hammott" relating to his
discoveries made in the vicinity of Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau since 1999; Burgess
claims to have found the treasure of BÃ©renger SauniÃ¨re: several mummified
corpses (one of which is allegedly Mary Magdalene) in three underground tombs
created by the Knights Templar under the orders of the Priory of Sion.[51]

## [edit] Alleged Grand Masters

The mythical Priory of Sion was supposedly led by a "Nautonnier", an Old
French word for a navigator, which means Grand Master in their internal
esoteric nomenclature. The following list of Grand Masters is derived from the
Dossiers Secrets d'Henri Lobineau compiled by Pierre Plantard under the nom de
plume of "Philippe Toscan du Plantier" in 1967. All those named on this list
had died before that date. All but two are also found on lists of alleged
âImperatorsâ (supreme heads) and âdistinguished membersâ of the
Ancient Mystical Order Rosae Crucis which circulated in France at the time
when Plantard was in touch with this Rosicrucian Order. Most of those named
share the common thread of being known for having an interest in the occult or
heresy.[14]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Leonardo da Vinci, alleged to be the Priory of Sion's 12th Grand Master

The Dossiers Secrets asserted that the Priory of Sion and the Knights Templar
always shared the same Grand Master until a schism occurred during the
"Cutting of the elm" incident in 1188. Following that event, the Grand Masters
of the Priory of Sion are listed as being:

  1. Jean de Gisors (1188â1220)
  2. Marie de Saint-Clair (1220â1266)
  3. Guillaume de Gisors (1266â1307)
  4. Edouard de Bar (1307â1336)
  5. Jeanne de Bar (1336â1351)
  6. Jean de Saint-Clair (1351â1366)
  7. Blanche d'Evreux (1366â1398)
  8. Nicolas Flamel (1398â1418)
  9. RenÃ© d'Anjou (1418â1480)
  10. Iolande de Bar (1480â1483)
  11. Sandro Filipepi (1483â1510)
  12. LÃ©onard de Vinci (1510â1519)
  13. ConnÃ©table de Bourbon (1519â1527)
  14. Ferdinand de Gonzague (1527â1575)
  15. Louis de Nevers (1575â1595)
  16. Robert Fludd (1595â1637)
  17. J. Valentin Andrea (1637â1654)
  18. Robert Boyle (1654â1691)
  19. Isaac Newton (1691â1727)
  20. Charles Radclyffe (1727â1746)
  21. Charles de Lorraine (1746â1780)
  22. Maximilian de Lorraine (1780â1801)
  23. Charles Nodier (1801â1844)
  24. Victor Hugo (1844â1885)
  25. Claude Debussy (1885â1918)
  26. Jean Cocteau (1918â1963)

A later document, Le Cercle d'Ulysse,[18] identifies FranÃ§ois Ducaud-Bourget,
a prominent Traditionalist Catholic priest who Plantard had worked for as a
sexton during World War II,[14] as the Grand Master following Cocteau's death.
Plantard himself is later identified as the next Grand Master.

When the Dossiers Secrets were exposed as a forgery by French researchers,
Plantard kept quiet. During his 1989 attempt to make a comeback and revive the
Priory of Sion, Plantard sought to distance himself from the discredited first
list, and published a second list of Priory Grand Masters,[52] which included
the names of the deceased Roger-Patrice Pelat, and his own son Thomas Plantard
de Saint-Clair:

  1. Jean-Tim Negri d'Albes (1681â1703)
  2. FranÃ§ois d'Hautpoul (1703â1726)
  3. AndrÃ©-Hercule de Fleury (1726â1766)
  4. Charles de Lorraine (1766â1780)
  5. Maximilian de Lorraine (1780â1801)
  6. Charles Nodier (1801â1844)
  7. Victor Hugo (1844â1885)
  8. Claude Debussy (1885â1918)
  9. Jean Cocteau (1918â1963)
  10. FranÃ§ois Balphangon (1963â1969)
  11. John Drick (1969â1981)
  12. Pierre Plantard de Saint-Clair (1981)
  13. Philippe de ChÃ©risey (1984â1985)
  14. Roger-Patrice Pelat (1985â1989)
  15. Pierre Plantard de Saint-Clair (1989)
  16. Thomas Plantard de Saint-Clair (1989)

In 1993 Plantard acknowledged that both lists were fraudulent when he was
investigated by a judge during the Pelat Affair.[41][53]

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b c d e Henry Lincoln, Michael Baigent, Richard Leigh, The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail, Corgi, 1982. ISBN 0-552-12138-X.
  2. ^ Pierre Plantard, Gisors et son secret..., ORBIS, 1961, abridged version contained in GÃ©rard de SÃ¨de, Les Templiers sont parmi nous. 1961.
  3. ^ a b Dan Brown, The Da Vinci Code, Doubleday, 2003. ISBN 0-385-50420-9.
  4. ^ Pierre Plantard, Gisors et son secret..., ORBIS, 1961, abridged version contained in GÃ©rard de SÃ¨de, Les Templiers sont parmi nous. 1962.
  5. ^ a b c Bill Putnam, John Edwin Wood, The Treasure of Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau. A Mystery Solved, Sutton Publishers, 2003.
  6. ^ The Secret of the Priory of Sion, '60 Minutes', 30 April 2006, presented by Ed Bradley, produced by Jeanne Langley, CBS News
  7. ^ a b Damian Thompson, "How Da Vinci Code tapped pseudo-fact hunger", Daily Telegraph. 2008. Retrieved on 2008-03-28.
  8. ^ David Klinghoffer, "The Da Vinci Protocols: Jews should worry about Dan Brownâs success", National Review Online, 2006. Retrieved on 2008-03-28.
  9. ^ Bernardo Sanchez Da Motta, Do Enigma de Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau ao Priorado de Siao - Historia de um Mito Moderno, Esquilo, 2005, p. 322, reproducing the Priory of Sion Registration Document showing the group was based in Plantard's apartment.
  10. ^ Bradley, Ed (2006). The Priory Of Sion: Is The "Secret Organization" Fact Or Fiction?. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2006/04/27/60minutes/main1552009_page2.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-16.
  11. ^ a b "Les Archives du PrieurÃ© de Sion", Le Charivari, NÂ°18, 1973. Containing a transcript of the 1956 Statutes of the Priory of Sion.
  12. ^ J. Cailleboite, "A Sous-Cassan et aux pervenches un missionnaire regarde la vie ouvriere", Circuit, NumÃ©ro spÃ©cial, October 1956.
  13. ^ Pierre Jarnac, Les Archives de Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau, Tome II, Editions Belisane, 1988, p. 566.
  14. ^ a b c d Introvigne, Massimo (2005). Beyond The Da Vinci Code: History and Myth of the Priory of Sion. http://www.cesnur.org/2005/pa_introvigne.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-16.
  15. ^ Marie-France Etchegoin & FrÃ©dÃ©ric Lenoir, Code Da Vinci: L'EnquÃªte, p.61 (Robert Laffont, 2004).
  16. ^ Jean-Luc Chaumeil, La Table d'Isis ou Le Secret de la LumiÃ¨re, Editions Guy TrÃ©daniel, 1994, p. 121â124.
  17. ^ Madeleine Blancassall, "Les Descendants MÃ©rovingiens ou lâÃ©nigme du RazÃ¨s wisigoth" (1965), in: Pierre Jarnac, Les MystÃ¨res de Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau, MÃ©langes Sulfureux, CERT, 1994.
  18. ^ a b Jean Delaude, Le Cercle dâUlysse (1977), in: Pierre Jarnac, Les MystÃ¨res de Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau, MÃ©langes Sulfureux, CERT, 1994.
  19. ^ A photograph of a young Thomas Plantard de Saint-Clair standing next to the Les Pontils tomb was published in Jean-Pierre Deloux, Jacques BrÃ©tigny, Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau - Capitale SecrÃ¨te de l'Histoire de France, 1982.
  20. ^ a b c Jean-Luc Chaumeil, Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau â Gisors â Le Testament du PrieurÃ© de Sion. Le CrÃ©puscule dâune TÃ©nÃ©breuse Affaire, Ãditions PÃ©gase, 2006.
  21. ^ Bill Putnam, John Edwin Wood, The Treasure of Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau, A Mystery Solved, Sutton Publishing, revised 2005 paperback edition, p.189â192. ISBN 0 7509 4216 9).
  22. ^ Bill Putnam, John Edwin Wood, The Treasure of Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau, A Mystery Solved, Sutton Publishing, revised 2005 paperback edition (ISBN 0 7509 4216 9). This book mentions Dr Wieland Willkerâs identification of the smaller âparchmentâ with the Codex Bezae.
  23. ^ The History of a Mystery, BBC 2, transmitted on 17 September 1996.
  24. ^ The Secret of the Priory of Sion, CBS News '60 Minutes', transmitted on 30 April, 2006, presented by Ed Bradley, produced By Jeanne Langley.
  25. ^ Conspiracies On Trial: The Da Vinci Code (The Discovery Channel); transmitted on 10 April 2005.
  26. ^ Pierre Jarnac, Les MystÃ¨res de Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau: MÃ¨lange Sulfureux (CERT, 1994).
  27. ^ Doug Moench, Factoid Books. The Big Book of Conspiracies, Paradox Press, 1995. ISBN-10: 1563891867.
  28. ^ Marie-France Etchegoin & FrÃ©dÃ©ric Lenoir, Code Da Vinci: LâEnquÃªte, p.61 (Robert Laffont; 2004).
  29. ^ Barbara Aho, "The Merovingian Dynasty. Satanic Bloodline of the Antichrist and False Prophet", watchpair.com, 1997. Retrieved on 2008-03-29.
  30. ^ Martin Kemp, Professor of Art History at Oxford University, on the documentary The History of a Mystery, BBC Two, transmitted on 17 September 1996, commenting on books like The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail: "There are certain historical problems, of which the Turin Shroud is one, in which there is 'fantastic fascination' with the topic, but a historical vacuum - a lack of solid evidence - and where there's a vacuum - nature abhores a vacuum - and historical speculation abhors a vacuum - and it all floods in...But what you end up with is almost nothing tangible or solid. You start from a hypothesis, and then that is deemed to be demonstrated more-or-less by stating the speculation, you then put another speculation on top of that, and you end up with this great tower of hypotheses and speculations - and if you say 'where are the rocks underneath this?' they are not there. It's like the House on Sand, it washes away as soon as you ask really hard questions of it."
  31. ^ Damian Thompson, Counterknowledge. How We Surrendered to Conspiracy Theories, Quack Medicine, Bogus Science and Fake History. Atlantic Books, 2008. ISBN-10: 1843546752.
  32. ^ Franck Marie, Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau: Etude Critique (SRES, 1978).
  33. ^ Jean-Luc Chaumeil,La Table d'Isis ou Le Secret de la LumiÃ¨re (Editions Guy TrÃ©daniel, 1994).
  34. ^ Pierre Jarnac, Histoire du TrÃ©sor de Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau (1985).
  35. ^ Pierre Jarnac, Les Archives de Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau (Editions Belisane, 1988). Describing The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail as a "monument of mediocrity".
  36. ^ Marie-France Etchegoin & FrÃ©dÃ©ric Lenoir, Code Da Vinci: L'EnquÃªte (Robert Laffont, 2004).
  37. ^ Massimo Introvigne, Gli Illuminati E Il Priorato Di Sion - La Verita Sulle Due Societa Segrete Del Codice Da Vinci Di Angeli E Demoni (Piemme; 2005).
  38. ^ Jean-Jacques Bedu, Les sources secrÃ¨tes du Da Vinci Code (Editions du Rocher, 2005).
  39. ^ Bernardo Sanchez Da Motta, Do Enigma de Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau ao Priorado de Siao - Historia de um Mito Moderno (Esquilo, 2005).
  40. ^ a b Miller, Laura (2005). The Last Word; The Da Vinci Con. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9B07E0DD103AF931A15751C0A9629C8B63. Retrieved on 2008-07-16.
  41. ^ a b c "Affaire Pelat: Le Rapport du Juge", Le Point, no. 1112 (8â14 January 1994), p. 11.
  42. ^ Les Cahiers de Rennes-le-Chateau, Nr. IX, Ãditions BÃ©lisane, 1989.
  43. ^ Jean-Jacques Bedu, Les sources secrÃ¨tes du Da Vinci Code, Editions du Rocher, 2005.
  44. ^ Philippe LaprÃ©vÃ´te, "Note sur lâactualitÃ© du PrieurÃ© de Sion", in: Politica Hermetica, Nr. 10 (1996), p. 140â151.
  45. ^ a b Laurent "Octonovo" Buccholtzer, "Pierre Plantard, GeneviÃ¨ve Zaepfell and the Alpha-Galates", in: Actes du Colloque 2006, Oeil-du-Sphinx, 2007.
  46. ^ Bulletin PÃ©gase NÂ°06, Janvier/Mars 2003.
  47. ^ Laurent "Octonovo" Buccholtzer, Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau, une Affaire Paradoxale, Oeil-du-Sphinx, 2008.
  48. ^ Laurent "Octonovo" Buccholtzer, Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau, une Affaire Paradoxale, Oeil-du-Sphinx, 2008.
  49. ^ Henry Lincoln, Michael Baigent, Richard Leigh, The Messianic Legacy, Dell, 1987. ISBN 0-440-20319-8.
  50. ^ Lynn Picknett, Clive Prince, The Sion Revelation. The Truth About the Guardians of Christ's Sacred Bloodline, Touchstone, 2006. ISBN-10: 0743263030.
  51. ^ Cinema Libre Studio, "Tomb Discovered in France Considered Knights Templar - When Excavated, Findings May Challenge the Tenets of Christianity", earthtimes.org, 2008. Retrieved on 2008-04-17.
  52. ^ The second list appeared in Vaincre No. 3, September 1989, p. 22.
  53. ^ Philippe LaprÃ©vÃ´te, "Note sur lâactualitÃ© du PrieurÃ© de Sion", in: Politica Hermetica, Nr. 10 (1996), p. 140â151.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Alternative Religions - Alternative Religions Resource Guides: Priory of Sion (R+C), Retrieved on 2008-06-20.
  * Introvigne, Massimo. The Da Vinci Code FAQ, or Will the Real Priory of Sion Please Stand Up?. CESNUR. Retrieved on 2008-06-20.
  * Netchacovitch, Johan. Chaumeil - Plantard in Gazette of Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau (12 April 2006). Retrieved on 2008-06-20.
  * Netchacovitch, Johan. Sole survivor of the Priory of Sion in Gazette of Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau (4 November 2006). Retrieved on 2008-06-20.
  * Polidoro, Massimo. The Secrets of Rennes-le-ChÃ¢teau: Notes on a Strange World. Committee for Skeptical Inquiry. Retrieved on 2008-06-20.
  * Wilson, Robert Anton. The Priory of Sion: Jesus, Freemasons, Extraterrestrials, The Gnomes of Zurich, Black Israelites and Noon Blue Apples in Gnosis Issue #6: Secret Societies (Winter 1987-'88). Retrieved on 2008-09-22.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Priory_of_Sion"

Categories: Conspiracy theories | Esotericism | Hoaxes | Priory of Sion hoax |
Pseudohistory | Secret societies

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 13:10.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



