
# Day of the Dead

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Day of the Dead (disambiguation).

"Dia De Los Muertos" redirects here. For other uses, see Dia De Los Muertos
(disambiguation).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Day of the Dead "Ofrenda"

The Day of the Dead (El DÃ­a de los Muertos in Spanish) is a holiday
celebrated mainly in Latin America and by Latinos (and others) living in the
United States and Canada. The holiday focuses on gatherings of family and
friends to pray for and remember friends and family members who have died. The
celebration occurs on the 1st and 2nd of November, in connection with the
Catholic holy days of All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day which take place on
those days. Traditions include building private altars honoring the deceased,
using sugar skulls, marigolds, and the favorite foods and beverages of the
departed, and visiting graves with these as gifts.

Scholars trace the origins of the modern holiday to indigenous observances
dating back thousands of years, and to an Aztec festival dedicated to a
goddess called Mictecacihuatl.

Similar holidays are celebrated in many parts of the world; for example, it's
a public holiday (Dia de Finados) in Brazil, where many Brazilians celebrate
by visiting cemeteries and churches. In Spain, there are festivals and
parades, and at the end of the day, people gather at cemeteries and pray for
their loved ones who have died. Similar observances occur elsewhere in Europe
and in the Philippines, and similarly-themed celebrations appear in many Asian
and African cultures.

## Contents

  * 1 Observance in Mexico
    * 1.1 Origins of Dia de Los Muertos
    * 1.2 Beliefs
  * 2 Observances outside Mexico
    * 2.1 United States
    * 2.2 Europe and elsewhere
      * 2.2.1 Latin America
      * 2.2.2 Asia
      * 2.2.3 Europe
      * 2.2.4 Other similar cultural traditions
  * 3 References in popular culture
  * 4 See also
  * 5 Notes
  * 6 Further reading
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Observance in Mexico

### [edit] Origins of Dia de Los Muertos

The Day of the Dead celebrations in Mexico can be traced back to the
indigenous Olmec, Zapotec, Mixtec, Mexican or Aztec, Maya, P'urhÃ©pecha, and
Totonac. Rituals celebrating the deaths of ancestors have been observed by
these civilizations perhaps for as long as 2500â3000 years. [1] In the pre-
Hispanic era, it was common to keep skulls as trophies and display them during
the rituals to symbolize death and rebirth.

The festival that became the modern Day of the Dead fell in the ninth month of
the Aztec calendar, about the beginning of August, and was celebrated for an
entire month. The festivities were dedicated to the goddess Mictecacihuatl,
[2] known as the "Lady of the Dead," corresponding to the modern Catrina.

In most regions of Mexico, November 1 honors children and infants, whereas
deceased adults are honored on November 2 by taunting them in their grave.
This is indicated by generally referring to November 1 mainly as "DÃ­a de los
Inocentes" (Day of the Innocents) but also as "DÃ­a de los Angelitos" (Day of
the Little Angels) and November 2 as "DÃ­a de los Muertos" or "DÃ­a de los
Difuntos" (Day of the Dead). [3]

### [edit] Beliefs

<IMG>

<IMG>

Families tidying and decorating graves at a cemetery in Almoloya del RÃ­o in
the State of Mexico.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Detail of an "Ofrenda" in Ciudad Universitaria, MÃ©xico.

Many people believe that during the Day of the Dead, it is easier for the
souls of the departed to visit the living. People go to cemeteries to
communicate with the souls of the departed, and build private altars,
containing the favorite foods and beverages, as well as photos and
memorabilia, of the departed. The intent is to encourage visits by the souls,
so that the souls will hear the prayers and the comments of the living
directed to them. Celebrations can take a humorous tone, as celebrants
remember funny events and anecdotes about the departed; [3] some get drunk to
celebrate the deceased.

Plans for the day are made throughout the year, including gathering the goods
to be offered to the dead. During the two-day period, families usually clean
and decorate graves;[2] most visit the cemeteries where their loved ones are
buried and decorate their graves with ofrendas (offerings), which often
include orange marigolds called "cempasÃºchitl" (originally named
cempoalxochitl, Nahuatl for "twenty (i.e., many) flowers"). In modern Mexico,
this name is sometimes replaced with the term "Flor de Muerto" ("Flower of the
Dead"). These flowers are thought to attract souls of the dead to the
offerings.

Toys are brought for dead children(los angelitos, or "the little angels"), and
bottles of tequila, mezcal or pulque or jars of atole for adults. Families
will also offer trinkets or the deceased's favorite candies on the grave.
Ofrendas are also put in homes, usually with foods such as candied pumpkin,
pan de muerto ("bread of the dead"), sugar skulls and beverages such as atole.
The ofrendas are left out in the homes as a welcoming gesture for the
deceased.[2] Some people believe the spirits of the dead eat the "spiritual
essence" of the ofrendas food, so even though the celebrators eat the food
after the festivities, they believe it lacks nutritional value. Pillows and
blankets are left out so that the deceased can rest after their long journey.
In some parts of Mexico, such as the towns of Mixquic, PÃ¡tzcuaro and
Janitzio, people spend all night beside the graves of their relatives.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Catrinas, one of the most popular figures of the Day of the Dead celebrations
in Mexico

Some families build altars or small shrines in their homes;[2] these usually
have the Christian cross, statues or pictures of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
pictures of deceased relatives and other persons, scores of candles and an
ofrenda. Traditionally, families spend some time around the altar, praying and
telling anecdotes about the deceased. In some locations, celebrants wear
shells on their clothing, so that when they dance, the noise will wake up the
dead; some will also dress up as the deceased.

Public schools at all levels build altars with ofrendas, usually omitting the
religious symbols. Government offices usually have at least a small altar, as
this holiday is seen as important to the Mexican heritage.

Those with a distinctive talent for writing sometimes create short poems,
called "calaveras" ("skulls"), mocking epitaphs of friends, describing
interesting habits and attitudes or funny anecdotes. This custom originated in
the 18th-19th century, after a newspaper published a poem narrating a dream of
a cemetery in the future, "and all of us were dead", proceeding to "read" the
tombstones. Newspapers dedicate calaveras to public figures, with cartoons of
skeletons in the style of the famous calaveras of JosÃ© Guadalupe Posada, a
Mexican illustrator. Theatrical presentations of Don Juan Tenorio by JosÃ©
Zorrilla (1817â1893) are also traditional on this day.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Island Pacanda, Lake Patzcuaro Mexico - DÃ­a de los Muertos

A common symbol of the holiday is the skull (colloquially called calavera),
which celebrants represent in masks, called calacas (colloquial term for
"skeleton"), and foods such as sugar or chocolate skulls, which are inscribed
with the name of the recipient on the forehead. Sugar skulls are gifts that
can be given to both the living and the dead. Other holiday foods include pan
de muerto, a sweet egg bread made in various shapes, from plain rounds to
skulls and rabbits, for celebrating this "fiesta" often decorated with white
frosting to look like twisted bones.

JosÃ© Guadalupe Posada created a famous print of a figure that he called "La
Calavera de la Catrina" ("calavera of the female dandy"), as a parody of a
Mexican upper class female. Posada's striking image of a costumed female with
a skeleton face has become associated with the Day of the Dead, and Catrina
figures often are a prominent part of modern Day of the Dead observances.

The traditions and activities that take place in celebration of the Day of the
Dead are not universal and often vary from town to town. For example, in the
town of PÃ¡tzcuaro on the Lago de PÃ¡tzcuaro in MichoacÃ¡n the tradition is
very different if the deceased is a child rather than an adult. On November 1
of the year after a child's death, the godparents set a table in the parents'
home with sweets, fruits, pan de muerto, a cross, a Rosary (used to ask the
Virgin Mary to pray for them) and candles. This is meant to celebrate the
child's life, in respect and appreciation for the parents. There is also
dancing with colorful costumes, often with skull-shaped masks and devil masks
in the plaza or garden of the town. At midnight on November 2, the people
light candles and ride winged boats called mariposas (Spanish for
"butterflies") to Janitzio, an island in the middle of the lake where there is
a cemetery, to honor and celebrate the lives of the dead there.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Pan de muerto, traditionally eaten on the holiday

In contrast, the town of Ocotepec, north of Cuernavaca in the State of Morelos
opens its doors to visitors in exchange for 'veladoras' (small wax candles) to
show respect for the recently dead. In return, the visitors receive tamales
and 'atole'. This is only done by the owners of the house where somebody in
the household has died in the previous year. Many people of the surrounding
areas arrive early to eat for free and enjoy the elaborate altars set up to
receive the visitors from 'MictlÃ¡n'.

In some parts of the country (especially the cities, where in recent years
there are displaced other customs) children in costumes roam the streets,
knocking on people's doors, for a calaverita, a small gift of candies or
money; they also ask passersby for it. This custom is similar to that of
Halloween's trick-or-treating, and is relatively recent.

Some people believe that possessing "DÃ­a de los Muertos" items can bring good
luck. Many people get tattoos or have dolls of the dead to carry with them.
They also clean their houses and prepare the favorite dishes of their deceased
loved ones to place upon their altar or ofrenda.

## [edit] Observances outside Mexico

### [edit] United States

<IMG>

<IMG>

Day of the Dead altar in Atlanta in memory of Jennifer Ann Crecente, murdered
at the age of 18 by her ex-boyfriend.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Day of the Dead altar in Los Angeles pays homage to "dead" (cancelled)
television shows, with traditional marigolds, sugar skulls and candles.

In many US communities with peoples from Mexico, Day of the Dead celebrations
are held, very similar to those held in Mexico. In some of these communities,
such as in Texas[4] and Arizona,[5] the celebrations tend to be mostly
traditional. For example, the All Souls' Procession has been an annual Tucson
event since 1990. The event combines elements of traditional Dia de los
Muertos celebrations with those of pagan harvest festivals. People wearing
masks carry signs honoring the dead and an urn in which people can put slips
of paper with prayers on them to be burned.[6]

In other communities, interactions between Mexican traditions and American
culture are resulting in celebrations in which Mexican traditions are being
extended to make artistic or sometimes political statements. For example, in
Los Angeles, California, the Self Help Graphics & Art Mexican-American
cultural center presents an annual Day of the Dead celebration, that includes
both traditional and political elements, such as altars to honor the victims
of the Iraq War highlighting the high casualty rate among Latino soldiers. An
updated, inter-cultural version of the Day of the Dead is also evolving at a
cemetery near Hollywood.[7] There, in a mixture of Mexican traditions and
Hollywood hip, conventional altars are set up side-by-side with altars to
Jayne Mansfield and Johnny Ramone. Colorful native dancers and music intermix
with performance artists, while sly pranksters play on traditional themes.

Similar traditional and inter-cultural updating of Mexican celebrations is
occurring in San Francisco, for example through the GalerÃ­a de la Raza,
SomArts Cultural Center, Mission Cultural Center, de Young Museum, in Oakland
at the Oakland Museum and with classes in the ancient art of Cartoneria at The
Crucible, a local arts education center, and in Missoula, Montana, where
skeletal celebrants on stilts, novelty bicycles, and skis parade through
town.[8] It also occurs annually at historic Forest Hills Cemetery in Boston's
Jamaica Plain neighborhood. Sponsored by Forest Hills Educational Trust and
the folkloric performance group La PiÃ±ata, the Day of the Dead celebration
celebrates the cycle of life and death. People bring offerings of flowers,
photos, mementos, mentos, and food for their departed loved ones which they
place at an elaborately and colorfully decorated altar. A program of
traditional music and dance also accompanies the community event.

### [edit] Europe and elsewhere

Observance of a Mexican-style Day of the Dead has spread to Europe as well. In
Prague, Czech Republic, for example, local citizens celebrate the Day of the
Dead with masks, candles, and sugar skulls.[9] Mexican-style Day of the Dead
celebrations can also be found in Wellington, New Zealand, complete with
altars celebrating the deceased with flowers and gifts.[10]

#### [edit] Latin America

Guatemalan celebrations of the Day of the Dead are highlighted by the
construction and flying of giant kites[11] in addition to the traditional
visits to gravesites of ancestors. A big event also is the consumption of
fiambre that is made only for this day during the year."[12]

The Brazilian public holiday of "Finados" (Day of the Dead) is celebrated on
November 2. Similar to other Day of the Dead celebrations, people go to
cemeteries and churches, with flowers, candles, and prayer. The celebration is
intended to be positive, to celebrate those who are deceased.

In Haiti, voodoo traditions mix with Roman Catholic Day of the Dead
observances, as, for example, loud drums and music are played at all-night
celebrations at cemeteries to waken Baron Samedi, the Loa of the dead, and his
mischievous family of offspring, the Gede.

Dia de los Ã±atitas (Day of the Skulls) is a festival celebrated in La Paz,
Bolivia on November 9. In pre-Columbian times, indigenous Andeans had a
tradition of sharing a day with the bones of their ancestors on the third year
after burial, however only the skulls are used today. Traditionally, the skull
of one or more family members are kept at home to watch over the family and
protect them during the year. On November 9, the family crowns the skull with
fresh flowers, sometimes also dressing it up in various garments, and makes
offerings of cigarettes, coca leaves, alcohol, and various other items in
thanks for the year's protection. The skulls are also sometimes taken to the
central cemetery in La Paz for a special mass and blessing.[13][14][15]

#### [edit] Asia

<IMG>

<IMG>

Flowers, including Mexican marigolds, used in the celebration of the Day of
the Dead

In the Philippines, the holiday is Araw ng mga Patay (Day of the Dead), Todos
Los Santos or Undas (the latter two due to the fact that this holiday is
celebrated on November 1, All Saints Day), and has more of a "family reunion"
atmosphere.[16] Tombs are cleaned or repainted, candles are lit, and flowers
are offered. Entire families camp in cemeteries, and sometimes spend a night
or two near their relatives' tombs. Card games, eating, drinking, singing and
dancing are common activities in the cemetery. It is considered a very
important holiday by many Filipinos (after Christmas and Holy Week), and
additional days are normally given as special non-working holidays (but only
November 1 is a regular holiday).

#### [edit] Europe

In many countries with a Roman Catholic heritage, All Saints Day and All Souls
Day have long been holidays where people take the day off work, go to
cemeteries with candles and flowers, and give presents to children, usually
sweets and toys.[17] In Portugal and Spain, ofrendas (offerings) are made on
this day. In Spain, the play Don Juan Tenorio is traditionally performed. In
Spain, Portugal, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, France and Ireland, people
bring flowers to the graves of dead relatives and say prayers over the dead.
In Poland,[18] Slovakia,[19] Hungary,[20] Lithuania,[21] Croatia,[22]
Slovenia,[23] Romania,[24] Austria, Germany, Sweden, Norway and Finland the
tradition is to light candles and visit the graves of deceased relatives. In
Tyrol, cakes are left for them on the table and the room kept warm for their
comfort. In Brittany, people flock to the cemeteries at nightfall to kneel,
bareheaded, at the graves of their loved ones, and to anoint the hollow of the
tombstone with holy water or to pour libations of milk on it. At bedtime, the
supper is left on the table for the souls.[25]

#### [edit] Other similar cultural traditions

Many other cultures around the world have similar traditions of a day set
aside to visit the graves of deceased family members. Often included in these
traditions are celebrations, food and beverages, in addition to prayers and
remembrances of the departed.

The Bon Festival (O-bon (ãç ?) or only Bon (ç ?) is a Japanese Buddhist
holiday to honor the departed spirits of one's ancestors. This Buddhist
festival has evolved into a family reunion holiday during which people from
the big cities return to their home towns and visit and clean their ancestors'
graves. Traditionally including a dance festival, it has existed in Japan for
more than 500 years. This holiday is three days in August.

In Korea, Chuseok is a major traditional holiday, also called Hankawi
(íê°ì,ä¸­ç§è). People go where the spirits of one's ancestors are
enshrined, and perform ancestral worship rituals early in the morning; they
visit the tombs of immediate ancestors to trim plants and clean the area
around the tomb, and offer food, drink, and crops to their ancestors.

The Qingming Festival (traditional Chinese: æ¸ æç¯; simplified Chinese: æ¸
æè; pinyin: qÄ«ng mÃ­ng jiÃ©) is a traditional Chinese festival usually
occurring around April 5 of the Gregorian calendar. Along with Double Ninth
Festival on the ninth day of the ninth month in the Chinese calendar, it is a
time to tend to the graves of departed ones. In addition, in the Chinese
tradition, the seventh month in the Chinese calendar is called the Ghost Month
(é¬¼æ), in which ghosts and spirits come out from the underworld to visit
earth.

During the Nepali holiday of Gai Jatra ("Cow Pilgrimage"), every family who
has lost a family member during the previous year makes a construction of
bamboo branches, cloth, paper decorations and portraits of the deceased,
called a "gai". Traditionally, a cow leads the spirits of the dead into the
next land. Depending on local custom, either an actual live cow, or a
construct representing a cow may be used. The festival is also a time to dress
up in costume, including costumes involving political comments and satire.[26]

In some cultures in Africa, visits to the graves of ancestors, the leaving of
food and gifts, and the asking of protection serve as important parts of
traditional rituals. One example of this is the ritual that occurs just before
the beginning of hunting season.[27]

In some tribes of the amazon they believe that the dead return as flowers
rather then butterflies.

## [edit] References in popular culture

<IMG>

<IMG>

Day of the Dead display in Ocotepec, a town outside of Cuernavaca.

  * The novel Under the Volcano (1947) by Malcolm Lowry takes place on this day in a fictionalized Cuernavaca, Morelos.
  * Ray Bradbury's novel The Halloween Tree (1972) includes an explanation of the holiday as part of a greater worldwide tradition, and features a Mexican sugar skull as a plot device.
  * The artwork for The Offspring's album Ixnay on the Hombre (1997), as well as subsequent singles, pay homage to the Day of the Dead.
  * The ska punk band The Voodoo Glow Skulls feature a song titled "DÃ­a de los Muertos" on their album AdicciÃ³n, TradiciÃ³n, RevoluciÃ³n.
  * Barbara Hambly's novel Days Of The Dead (2003) climaxes on this day in 1835.
  * In Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban (2004), some traditional sugar skulls can be seen on shelves when Harry enters the candy store Honeydukes through the secret passage.
  * The film Once Upon a Time in Mexico, directed by Robert Rodriguez, takes place in the days leading up to the Day of the Dead, culminating in numerous acts of violence on the holiday itself.
  * The plot and title of the first episode of the Adult Swim series The Venture Bros., "Dia de Los Dangerous!", takes place on this day. The series' titular characters, Hank and Dean Venture, purchase sombreros and sugar skulls, then Hank describes the events to their father, who has just given a lecture to a very small audience, due in part to the holiday.
  * The computer game Grim Fandango relies heavily on Day of the Dead imagery, with most characters resembling Calaca-like figurines.
  * The Crow: City of Angels takes place during Day of the Dead.
  * This Mexican national holiday appeared in the direct-to-video animated film Scooby-Doo and the Monster of Mexico.

## [edit] See also

  * Ancestor worship
  * Danse Macabre
  * Samhain

  * Santa Muerte
  * Thursday of the Dead
  * Walpurgis Night
  * Halloween

  
## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Miller, Carlos (2005). "History: Indigenous people wouldn't let 'Day of the Dead' die". Day of the Dead - Dia De Los Muertos (The Arizona Republic). http://www.azcentral.com/ent/dead/history/. Retrieved on 2007-11-28.
  2. ^ a b c d Salvador, R. J. (2003). John D. Morgan and Pittu Laungani. ed. Death and Bereavement Around the World: Death and Bereavement in the Americas. Death, Value and Meaning Series, Vol. II. Amityville, New York: Baywood Publishing Company. pp. 75â76 Day Of The Dead?. ISBN 0895032325.
  3. ^ a b Palfrey, Dale Hoyt (1995). "The Day of the Dead". DÃ­a de los Muertos Index. Access Mexico Connect. http://www.mexconnect.com/mex_/muertos.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-28.
  4. ^ Wise, Danno. "Port Isabel's Day of the Dead Celebration". Texas Travel. About.com. http://gotexas.about.com/od/festivals/a/Dayofdead.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-28.
  5. ^ Hedding, Judy. "Day of the Dead". Phoenix. About.com. http://phoenix.about.com/od/events/a/dayofthedead.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-28.
  6. ^ White, Erin (2006-11-05). "All Souls Procession". Arizona Daily Star. http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-153859362.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-28.
  7. ^ Making a night of Day of the Dead Los Angeles Times October 18, 2006; accessed November 26, 2006.
  8. ^ Photos of Missoula, Montana Day of the Dead parade.
  9. ^ Day of the Dead in Prague.
  10. ^ Day of the Dead in Wellington, New Zealand
  11. ^ Visit to cemetery in Guatemala
  12. ^ Observance in Guatemala Accessed June 11, 2007.
  13. ^ Guidi, Ruxandra (2007-11-09). "Las Natitas". BBC. http://www.theworld.org/?q=node/13922&answer=true.
  14. ^ Smith, Fiona (2005-11-08). "Bolivians Honor Skull-Toting Tradition". Associated Press. http://www.latinamericanstudies.org/bolivia/skulls.htm. Retrieved on 2007-12-30.
  15. ^ "All Saints day in Bolivia - "The skull festival"". Bolivia Line (November 2005). http://www.bolivialine.com/bolivia/newsletter/Newsletter200511.htm. Retrieved on 2007-12-20.
  16. ^ "One of the many Filipino traditions often practiced is celebrating All Saints'/Souls' Day or Day of the Dead." Accessed Nov. 26, 2007.
  17. ^ All Saints Day celebrations in Italy
  18. ^ Polish observance Accessed June 11, 2007.
  19. ^ Slovakia observance. Accessed June 11, 2007.
  20. ^ Hungary observance. Accessed June 11, 2007.
  21. ^ Lithuanian observance. Accessed June 11, 2007
  22. ^ Croatian observance. Accessed June 11, 2007
  23. ^ Slovenian observance. Accessed November 5, 2007.
  24. ^ Romanian observance. Accessed June 11, 2007.
  25. ^ See All Saints Day, All Souls Day.
  26. ^ Nepali holiday honoring the dead. Accessed June 11, 2007
  27. ^ African ancestor ritual; Importance in many traditional religions throughout all of Africa serve as communications with ancestors

## [edit] Further reading

  * Brandes, Stanley (2006-12-15). Skulls to the Living, Bread to the Dead. Blackwell Publishing. pp. 232\. ISBN 1405152478. http://books.google.com/books?id=rlyTyVbhBYUC&printsec=frontcover&hl=fr. Retrieved on 2006-05-14.
  * _____. "The Day of the Dead, Halloween, and the Quest for Mexican National Identity." Journal of American Folklore 442 (1998) : 359-80.
  * _____. "Sugar, Colonialism, and Death: On the Origins of Mexico's Day of the Dead" Comparative Studies in Sociology and History 39.2 (1997): 270-299
  * _____. "Iconogaphy in Mexico's Day of the Dead." Ethnohistory 45.2(1998):181-218
  * Carmichael, Elizabeth. Sayer, Chloe. The Skeleton at the Feast: The Day of the Dead in Mexico. Great Britain: The Bath Press, 1991.
  * Conklin, Paul. "Death Takes A Holiday." U.S. Catholic 66 (2001) : 38-41.
  * Garcia-Rivera, Alex. "Death Takes a Holiday." U.S. Catholic 62 (1997) : 50.
  * Roy, Ann. "A Crack Between the Worlds." Commonwealth 122 (1995) : 13-16
  * Shawn D. Haley and Curt Fukuda Day of the Dead: When Two Worlds Meet in Oaxaca, Berhahn Books, 2004.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Category:Day of the
Dead  
  * DÃ­as de los Muertos photo and information site
  * DÃ­as de los Muertos Palomar College Site
  * azcentral.com's Dia de los Muertos information site
  * Day of the Dead in Oaxaca, Mexico

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Day_of_the_Dead"

Categories: Cemeteries | Death customs | Festivals in Mexico | Religious
holidays | Mexican culture | Mexican American culture | Latin American culture
| Latin American folklore | November observances | Autumn holidays | Mexican
folklore | Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity

Hidden categories: Articles containing Japanese language text | Articles
containing non-English language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * Limburgs
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 04:48.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



