
# Bohemianism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Bohemian (disambiguation).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Pierre-Auguste Renoir, The Bohemian (or Lise the Bohemian), 1868, oil on
canvas, Berlin, Germany: Alte Nationalgalerie

The term bohemian, of French origin, was first used in the English language in
the nineteenth century[1] to describe the untraditional lifestyles of
marginalised and impoverished artists, writers, musicians, and actors in major
European cities. Bohemians were associated with unorthodox or
antiestablishment political or social viewpoints, which were often expressed
through free love, frugality, and/or voluntary poverty.

The term emerged in France in the early 19th century when artists and creators
began to concentrate in the lower-rent, lower class gypsy neighbourhoods. The
term bohÃ©mien was a common term for the Romani people of France, who had
reached Western Europe via Bohemia.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Origin of term
  * 2 People
  * 3 Bohemian communities in the past
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
    * 5.1 Notes
    * 5.2 Bibliography
    * 5.3 Further reading
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Origin of term

Literary Bohemians were associated in the French imagination with roving
Gypsies (called bohemians because they were believed to have arrived from
Bohemia[3][4]), outsiders apart from conventional society and untroubled by
its disapproval. The term carries a connotation of arcane enlightenment (the
opposite of Philistines), and also carries a less frequently intended,
pejorative connotation of carelessness about personal hygiene and marital
fidelity. The Spanish gypsy in the French opera Carmen set in Seville, is
referred to as a bohÃ©mienne in Meilhac and HalÃ©vy's libretto (1875).

> The term 'Bohemian' has come to be very commonly accepted in our day as the
description of a certain kind of literary gypsy, no matter in what language he
speaks, or what city he inhabits .... A Bohemian is simply an artist or
littÃ©rateur who, consciously or unconsciously, secedes from conventionality
in life and in art. (Westminster Review, 1862[2])

Henri Murger's collection of short stories ScÃ¨nes de la Vie de BohÃ¨me
(Scenes of Bohemian Life), published in 1845, was written to glorify and
legitimise Bohemia.[5] Murger's collection formed the basis of Giacomo
Puccini's opera La bohÃ¨me (1896). Puccini's work, in turn, became Jonathan
Larson's source material for the musical Rent, later a feature film of the
same name. Like Puccini, Larson explores a Bohemian enclave in a dense urban
area, in this case, New York City at the end of the 20th century. The show
features a song, "La Vie Boheme," which celebrates postmodern Bohemian
culture.

In English, Bohemian in this sense was initially popularised in William
Makepeace Thackeray's novel, Vanity Fair, published in 1848, although public
perceptions of the alternative life-styles supposedly led by artists were
chiefly moulded by George du Maurier's highly romanticised best-selling novel
of Bohemian culture Trilby (1894). The novel outlines the fortunes of three
expatriate English artists, their Irish model, and two very colourful Eastern
European musicians, in the artists' quarter of Paris.

In Spanish literature, the Bohemian impulse can be seen in RamÃ³n del Valle-
InclÃ¡n's play Luces de Bohemia (Bohemian Lights), published in 1920.

## [edit] People

The term has become associated with various artistic or academic communities
and is used as a generalized adjective describing such people, environs, or
situations: bohemian (bohoâinformal) is defined in The American College
Dictionary as "a person with artistic or intellectual tendencies, who lives
and acts with no regard for conventional rules of behavior."

Many prominent European and American figures of the last 150 years belonged to
the bohemian counterculture, and any comprehensive 'list of bohemians' would
be tediously long. Bohemianism has been approved of by some bourgeois writers
such as HonorÃ© de Balzac, but most conservative cultural critics do not
condone bohemian lifestyles.

The New York Times columnist David Brooks contends that much of the cultural
ethos of upper-class Americans is Bohemian-derived, coining the paradoxical
term "Bourgeois Bohemians" or "Bobos."[6]

The Bombshell Manual of Style author, Laren Stover, breaks down the Bohemian
into five distinct mind-sets/styles in Bohemian Manifesto: a Field Guide to
Living on the Edge. The Bohemian is "not easily classified like species of
birds," writes Stover, noting that there are crossovers and hybrids. The five
types are:

  * Nouveau:- bohemians with money who attempt to join traditional bohemianism with contemporary culture
  * Gypsy:- drifters, neo-hippies, and others with nostalgia for previous, romanticized eras
  * Beat:- also drifters, but non-materialist and art-focused
  * Zen:- "post-beat," focus on spirituality rather than art
  * Dandy:- no money, but try to appear as if they have it by expensive or rare items - such as brands of alcohol[7]

In the United States, the bohemian impulse can be seen in the 1960s hippie
counterculture (which was in turn informed by the Beat generation via writers
such as William S. Burroughs, Allen Ginsberg, and Jack Kerouac).

Rainbow Gatherings may be seen as another contemporary worldwide expression of
the bohemian impulse.[8]

## [edit] Bohemian communities in the past

By extension, Bohemia meant any place where one could live and work cheaply,
and behave unconventionally; a community of free souls beyond the pale of
respectable society. Several cities and neighbourhoods came to be associated
with bohemianism in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries:

In Europe: Montmartre and Montparnasse in Paris; Chelsea, Bedford Park, Camden
Town, Fitzrovia and Soho in London; Stroud in Britain; Schwabing in Munich;
Skadarlija in Belgrade; LavapiÃ©s in Madrid; Isola and Colonne di San Lorenzo
in Milan.

In Australia: Potts Point, Sydney.[9]

In South Africa: Yeoville, Johannesburg (before 1984; soon declined into a
slum thereafter) Source: Byron Dean Griffin.

In the Americas: Greenwich Village, the East Village and Chelsea in New York
City; Provincetown, Massachusetts; Ann Arbor, Michigan; Carmel-by-the-Sea,
California and Venice Beach and Silver Lake, Los Angeles; North Beach, Haight-
Ashbury, and the Mission District in San Francisco; the Fremont neighborhood
of Seattle; Logan Square and Wicker Park in Chicago; the French Quarter in New
Orleans; Austin, Texas; Madison, Wisconsin, Albuquerque, New Mexico, Lapa,
Ipanema and Leblon in Rio de Janeiro; Kensington Market in Toronto[10]; East
Van in Vancouver; CoyoacÃ¡n and Condesa in Mexico City.

One of the ironies of these once bohemian communities in the United States is
their tendency towards rapid gentrification and the commercialisation and
decay of the bohemian culture that provided the initial attractive character
of the community.[11][12][13]

## [edit] See also

Related terms

  * Avant-garde
  * Art colony
  * Bohemian style
  * Counterculture
  * Literary Kicks
  * Metropia
  * Punk subculture
  * Simple living
  * Slumming
  * Squatter
  * Subculture

Related cultures or movements

  * Beat generation
  * Beatnik
  * Merry Pranksters
  * Dandy
  * Goth
  * Hipster
  * Hippie
  * Indie
  * Punk
  * Diggers

  
## [edit] References

### [edit] Notes

  1. ^ First occurrence in this sense in English, 1848 (OED).
  2. ^ a b Harper, Douglas (November 2001). "Bohemian etymology". Online Etymology Dictionary. http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=Bohemian. Retrieved on 2008-12-27.
  3. ^ Bohemian at "Online Etymology Dictionary". http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=bohemian. It also mentions another possibility: the term may be related to Bohemia via Bohemian religious heretics.
  4. ^ Bohemian in The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition. Houghton Mifflin Company.
  5. ^ "Scenes de la Vie de Boheme". www.mtholyoke.edu. http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/rschwart/hist255/bohem/tscenes.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-22.
  6. ^ Brooks, David (2001). Bobos in Paradise: the New Upper Class and How They Got There. New York NY: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 0-684-85378-7.
  7. ^ Stover, Laren. Bohemian Manifesto: a Field Guide to Living on the Edge. Bulfinch Press=2004. ISBN 0-8212-2890-0.
  8. ^ Niman, Michael I. (1997). People of the Rainbow: a Nomadic Utopia. Knoxville: The University of Tennessee Press. ISBN 0-87049-988-2.
  9. ^ Bonner, Raymond (23 September 2007). "Australiaâs Bohemian Heart". The New York Times. http://travel.nytimes.com/2007/09/23/travel/23dayout.html.
  10. ^ Scowen, Peter. "At the intersection of immigrant and hippie", The Globe and Mail, 10 November 2007. {{cite web|url=http://www.theglobeandmail.com/servlet/story/RTGAM.20071109.wflorida10/BNStory/Front/ title=Full text of article]
  11. ^ Mele, Christopher (2000). Selling the Lower East Side. Univ of Minnesota. ISBN 0-8166-3182-4.
  12. ^ Lloyd, Richard (2006). Neo-Bohemia. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-95182-8.
  13. ^ Cash, Stephanie. "âLandlords put a squeeze on Brooklyn artists.â". Art in America 89 (3): 39â40.

### [edit] Bibliography

  * Easton, Malcolm (1964). Artists and Writers in Paris. The Bohemian Idea, 1803â1867 (ASIN B0016A7CJA ed.). London: Arnold.
  * GraÃ±a, CÃ©sar (1964). Bohemian versus Bourgeois: French Society and the French Man of Letters in the Nineteenth Century. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0465007368.
  * Stansell, Christine (2000). American Moderns: Bohemian New York and the Creation of a New Century. Henry Holt & Company. ISBN 0805048472.
  * Wilson, Elizabeth (2002). Bohemians: The Glamorous Outcasts. Tauris Parke Paperbacks. ISBN 1860647820.

### [edit] Further reading

  * Siegel, Jerrold (1999). Bohemian Paris: Culture, Politics, and the Boundaries of Bourgeois Life, 1830-1930. The Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0801860638.

## [edit] External links

  * Bohemianism and Counter-Culture

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Romanticism  
Culture

Bohemianism Â· Ossian Â· Romantic nationalism Â· Wallenrodism  
Literature

Andersen Â· Blake Â· Bryant Â· Burns Â· Byron Â· Chateaubriand Â· Coleridge Â·
Cooper Â· Eichendorff Â· Espronceda Â· Goethe Â· Grimm Brothers Â· Hawthorne
Â· Heine Â· Hoffmann Â· HÃ¶lderlin Â· Hugo Â· Irving Â· Keats Â· Kleist Â·
Krasinski Â· Lamartine Â· Leopardi Â· Lermontov Â· Malczewski Â· Mickiewicz Â·
Musset Â· Nerval Â· Norwid Â· Novalis Â· OehlenschlÃ¤ger Â· Poe Â· Pushkin Â·
Schiller Â· Scott Â· Mary Shelley Â· Shelley Â· Slowacki Â· Stendhal Â· Tieck
Â· Wordsworth Â· Zhukovsky  
Music

Alkan Â· Auber Â· Beethoven Â· Bellini Â· Berlioz Â· Berwald Â· Chopin Â·
FÃ©licien David Â· Ferdinand David Â· Donizetti Â· Field Â· Franck Â· Glinka
Â· HalÃ©vy Â· Liszt Â· Loewe Â· Marschner Â· MÃ©hul Â· Mendelssohn Â·
Meyerbeer Â· Moscheles Â· Paganini Â· Rossini Â· Schubert Â· Schumann Â·
Thalberg Â· Verdi Â· Wagner Â· Weber  
Philosophy and aesthetics

Coleridge Â· Goethe Â· Schiller Â· MÃ¼ller Â· Schleiermacher Â· Tieck Â·
Feuerbach Â· Fichte Â· Wackenroder Â· Schlegel  
Visual arts

Blake Â· Briullov Â· Constable Â· Corot Â· Dahl Â· Delacroix Â· Friedrich Â·
Fuseli Â· GÃ©ricault Â· Gothic Revival architecture Â· Goya Â· Hudson River
School Â· Leutze Â· Martin Â· Nazarene movement Â· Palmer Â· Runge Â· Turner
Â· Ward Â· Wiertz  
Â« Age of Enlightenment

Realism Â»  
<IMG>

This article is in need of attention from an expert on the subject. Please
help recruit one or improve this article yourself. See the talk page for
details. Please consider using {{Expert-subject}} to associate this request
with a WikiProject. (April 2008)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bohemianism"

Categories: Romanticism | Underground culture | History of subcultures

Hidden categories: Articles needing expert attention since April 2008 |
Uncategorized articles needing expert attention

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 08:07.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



